# Diego "rehrar" Salazar

_**Critical Decentralisation Cluster 36c3 - Monero Introduction (Diego "rehrar" Salazar)**_

[youtu.be/XZpWlfDtd5g](https://youtu.be/XZpWlfDtd5g)

_**Transcription**_

_Diego:_ Hello C3, welcome to the Critical Decentralisation Cluster, spelled with an S not a Z, decentralization, because we are in Europe. For those of you who were here last year, you know that we were also here last year, and for those of you and other clusters who had to listen to me last year, here I am again for you to listen to me. My name is Diego Salazar, I'm going to be the MC for this stage, we've got a lot of great content coming up, we're gonna be covering everything from open hardware FOSS and Asia, just a bunch of really neat stuff, cryptocurrencies. This cluster is sponsored by RIAT and Monero. Oh look, they're giving me a thing… hmm dude you shouldn't be looking at that stuff here… just kidding. So for those of you who are interested in what we have to offer you can go to decentral.community, yes stock community is a TLD now, you can go to decentral.community, we have all sorts of resources up there for you, our schedule, we've got access schedule, it's kind of hard to miss in the navigation if you click on schedule you can see everything we got going on, we've got things, we've got workshops, we've got talks here on the stage, FOSS ASIS over there's gonna be running workshops periodically you can check in with them, they've got some really cool stuff to show.

We're gonna take this time at the beginning of our cluster, stage period I guess, to introduce all of the projects that are here with us. We have several of them and we'd like for you to meet them, all they're gonna come up here into one by one, they're gonna say who they are, what they do, what their mission is, what you can expect from them over these next three days. We hope that you guys come back and visit us if any of our talks are content interests you, we've always got people over here to talk to if you have any questions about anything that you hear about the stage or anything that you want to talk about in terms of cryptocurrencies, Monero. We've also got coffee back there from the Parallelni Polis people, and they're gonna tell you all about that, but you know it is perpetually 1 in the morning in here, if you know, there is no Sun, so the coffee is good to help keep you going.

Let's see, all right I've been on for two minutes and I have 15 minutes for this kind of opening introduction. I know I keep making this joke for any of you have seen me on the stage before, they always give me way too much time for this introduction. So actually I'm gonna go ahead and move into the next portion which is talking about Monero. I am also a part of Monero, the Monero community, and while I do have a couple of presentations particularly on tomorrow I'm gonna be talking about FOSS and different funding models but then the next day after that I'm gonna be giving a presentation about Monero, how it works, kind of the underlying stuff, a blockchain where Monero fits into, all of this. I just want to let you guys know just a little bit briefly what Monero is why we are here, particularly why we are here in C3, what the Monero community believes in, believe it or not this entire cluster all of the decorations that have been put up, all the people met some of the people that I've been flown out here, this was all funded by the Monero community.

So Monero for those of you who don't know is a cryptocurrency, it's similar to Bitcoin except it's private by default and mandatory, Bitcoin is not, Bitcoin is traceable. And Monero unlike many other cryptocurrencies did not have an ICO, did not have a premine, did not have any of this stuff that a lot of these other coins have had. And it's because of this lack of kind of this commercial nature that C3 is actually… we're pretty much the only cryptocurrency that is here at C3, because we are really definitely in that whole grassroots area you know non-commercial type thing. So whenever we need to fund something, like all of this that you see here, we have a crowdfunding platform of our own similar to Kickstarter I guess you know what's called the CCS, the Community Crowdfunding System, and basically the RIAT guys they put together like we need all of this for the stage, we need to pay these people we need to get these supplies, and the Monero community funded this whole thing it was, it was a lot of money and everybody donated a lot of money and a lot of time, and you're gonna hear more when Matthias comes up here and talked about RIAT about just what was done to make this kind of all come together. It's really fascinating we are thrilled to be back. Last year was a blast for any of you guys here, last year where do you where any of you guys in this cluster last year and checking this out? No? None of you guys came. That's okay. We still love you and we hope that you'll enjoy your time here.

We now have another stage to compete with, so we may get a dancing clown over here something to kind of bring people from over there: they seem very engaged, they seem a lot more engaged than you guys seem engaged, so I think I got to stop up my game over here they're looking very intensely. Anyway where we have we're thrilled that C3 had us back, we've got a lot of new great content this year, oh no, he's telling me go back and Diego go into the light, go into the light… Kind of lost my train of thought… So, content, okay thank you. We've got a lot of great content once again please go to the website all of our schedule is there and there's links in particular too. So if you want to learn any more about anything that is on the schedule there's links that take you to kind of not just kind of… excuse me, I'm very jet-lagged by the way, I'm so tired. Tomorrow is my second day here, in Leipzig, I mean from the United States. Tomorrow will be a much better day and I will, if all of my jokes fall flat today please let's just attribute it not to my lack of a sense my of a sense of humor but to the fact that I'm very very tired. But I love you all so much that I'm here anyway, just for you, when I could be back at my hotel room sleeping. Or you know they have hammocks, they were just telling me that they have hammocks over there where I can go sleep does anybody have a hammock can you share?

So I am going to go ahead and get off this stage, and I'm going to invite Matthias up here, we're already way ahead of schedule, but that's a good problem to have instead of to be behind schedule. We're gonna invite Matthias up here to talk about RIAT. Oh no, he's doing a thing. All right, you know I just got keep doing that I'm so sorry guys, I know, I know you came here for quality content and instead you're getting Diego rambling about things trying to stall for time as we get a few things done. They were like: Diego, you're supposed to be on here for 15 minutes for the introduction, for 15 minutes for Monero and guess what guys it's 5:07. So I'm already in trouble.

There's not much to say about Monero. It's really boring. You know if Ethereum claim to fame is like it's worth the world computer, and Bitcoin’s like we're the first cryptocurrency, and Monero’s like: yeah we just we're like Bitcoin, but we're private. And whenever we make new technology that comes outside: oh that's cool what does it do? It makes Monero more private. Now it's not, it's like plumbing you know. Every house needs plumbing. If you don't have plumbing like you're not, you're not gonna use this house very often, no, you're gonna go someplace else because eventually you're gonna need plumbing. But it's not the cool thing about your house right? When you bring new people into your house you're like: look at this look at this mantelpiece, look at this fireplace I got built, look at my kitchen and this big refrigerator I have. You don't go look at this plumbing. I mean you can't see it most of it, but like it's there and it's exquisite right? That's like what Monero is to society because we believe in privacy, we believe everybody has a right to privacy. And with the particular audience that comes to C3 I don't think I have to do much convincing to you guys that privacy is important, open source software is important right? And so Monero we really lean into that but we really lean into the foundations and the basics of it, and it's just doesn't have this big shine which is very unfortunate, because I think personally that's something like Monero or privacy you know by default and mandatory not just in our finances but in a lot of the other areas of our lives such as you know what we put on to our computers, who we let into our homes who listens to us on a day-to-day basis via the electronic devices that we carry all the time like, these are all things that people need to think about, these are all things that people need to consider and something like Monero gives people that option.

So once again come to my talk *Monero for Scrubs* on day three. This is day one, yesterday was like day zero, it's day one, always kind of semi dead, because people are kind of setting up, day two is I kind of busy last year, it was day two is a lot of hustle and bustle, then was kind of alright, that's good alright, it was kind of okay for me C3 doesn't even start until I'm on stage, so you know what do I know.

Okay let's take audience questions now while we're still stalling for time. Who's out? You there, yes, yes, how… no no no… it's you. You want to come up on stage with me? No? Yes, okay that's totally fine. You broke my heart just now, but it's totally fine. Thank you for this opportunity for audience questions and now that that segment is over as soon as it hasn’t begin. So I think I will stop rambling at this point. I think I will when there we do… wait guys we do have an audience question! Okay…

Ooh, okay. You know that's a good question, it's not something I'm gonna cover in my talk, this a little bit more advanced, so I'll actually go ahead and cover it here. For those who didn't hear the question, he said he read the Cryptonote paper, he's just trying to flex on all of us, he's like you know I read like academic papers and stuff you know, he's like I read the Cryptonote paper and my question was you know how does the privacy of something like Monero compared to the privacy of something like ZCash. So that sounds like something interesting to explore, that'll kill a bunch of time, so I'm all for it.

So I mean Monero versus ZCash we get this kind of question a lot and it's not just versus ZCash people say well what how does the Monero compared to something like Zerocoin and how does Monero compared to something like Verge or all these other coins that claim privacy in various different ways.

So as I think many of us here know there's many ways to achieve privacy. Okay first of all let me back up all the way to the foundation of this step zero, foundation is really… not enough foundation, privacy is really really really hard it's really hard to get right, it's really difficult to minimize all the metadata leakage, it's so difficult, and if you mess up just once you can really ruin it for yourself. Privacy is all about revealing what you want, when you want, and to who you want. And I will answer your question I'm not just kind of circling around cuz I don't know okay. These are all very important things to think about because really what privacy is at its root is it's blocking metadata leakage, it's blocking things getting out about you that you don't want to get out, right, and there's various ways that people do this. In terms of cryptocurrencies they try to do this kind of in an opt-in method where most transactions are private and you can kind of opt in to, you can turn on the privacy technologies, some they say you know what we don't want to mess with this at all, and like Bitcoin they kind of try to do this on a second layer, on the base layer of Bitcoin there's no privacy, but if you jump up to something like Lightning you know you can kind of go into that, or if you use kind of a third-party tool like Wasabi or Samurai wallet or some sort of mixing service then you can kind of try to increase your privacy that way, whereas something like Monero says no no no privacy doesn't work that way. It's all or if we view of it we view it much more extremely it's kind of all or nothing, and the way that I like to talk about it is it's similar to driving okay. You could be the best driver in the world, you could be the safest driver in the world, but it's not you that you have to worry about when you get behind the wheel and you start driving around your city, it's not you have to worry about, it's everybody else, because even if you're the safest driver it all it takes is one drunk driver to hit you and kill you right? Privacy is the same way. Privacy graphs you know being able to kind of link people to each other or link transactions to each other, you could do everything perfectly, take all the right steps, and like if you're trying to remain private in Bitcoin there is a lot of steps to remaining private and Bitcoin like you can't reuse addresses, you can't consolidate your transactions after the fact, bla-bla-bla. The list goes on and on, you can look those up for yourself, you can do all of this 100% perfectly, but then if you transact with somebody that is not doing this well, this is the drunk driver that's going to hit you, this is the person that you're not aware of, that is not doing things well and now this person is linked to you, and all that work that you've done will be for nothing. So Monero kind of goes about this in the way that we say what if we made all the drivers safe by default. I wish that was a thing in real life where we can make a whole drivers drive sanely by default but that doesn't work that way. But we can kind of enforce out on a protocol level with Monero where we say let's make sure that everybody uses a baseline, a sane base level of privacy, so everybody is covered in this way.

So kind of when we're looking towards ZCash first of all they have opt-in privacy, so not many people use it but it is theoretically more robust. So now we're going to kind of talk about zero knowledge, zkSnarks versus something like RingCT, which Monero uses. So for those of you who don't know ZCash uses something called zkSnarks which is a cool little thing that they develop for themselves. It's basically mathematical magic where they say we can know nothing about particular something and prove it is still something. Google has been doing stuff with zk with zero knowledge, zero knowledge is not just for cryptocurrencies, like what something Google has been working on which I just heard about, which I think is just mind-blowing, where you can send them a search but it's completely encrypted, and they get that search and they don't know what you sent them, because it's encrypted, but it's encrypted in zero knowledge, and then they are able to get the results and send those results back to you, and they still have no idea what you sent them. It was all done in zero knowledge, so then you get that it's absolutely insane, it's math magic basically, it's kind of wizardry, I don't even think it's real, but it's this idea that you can prove something about something without knowing anything about it. So ZCash has this thing where they can prove in very mathematical cool, mathematically clever and cool ways certain things about a transaction to show that Monero, not Monero, sorry, coin is not created or destroyed, to show that everything adds up, and everything is kosher, and it's not breaking anything of the protocol. Very nifty, very very cool, ok. But the issue that a lot of the Monero people take with ZCash is that it requires a trusted setup. In order to get this magic to work you have to have a wizard at some point, wave a magic wand and say a magic thing. And if this wizard waving this wand and saying this thing remembers what he said and how he said it, then all of a sudden he's going to be able to do some pretty and crazy things, he's going to be able to print infinite ZCash, and he would be able to theoretically crack some of the privacy of ZCash, maybe not all of it, but the privacy would weaken because of certain attacks that he could do. In this case this wizard is not a funny image, this wizard is a certain number in order to setup this whole ZCash thing the trustus setup requires a number, and they try to mitigate this risk by say ok what if we have five different people generate the number so that way no one person can know that number at any given time, what if you know… and if even one of these five people is honest and destroys it destroys this portion of the number, then we never can assemble the full number again, and nobody would ever know. And you know they're trying to make that even more robust by saying what if it's not five people, what if it's 70 people and still just one person needs to be honest. So ZCash is very very strong in terms of trusted privacy. There is some element of trust at some point, there is some element of trust required for this privacy to work.

Monero conversely uses RingCT and we have a wonderful wonderful book called ‘Mastering Monero’ which you can look at, there's a free PDF that you could download, there's also physical copies if you prefer those to order masteringmonero.com, and it takes you through a lot of the technologies that Monero use, and a lot of great analogies, and how it works. So Monero doesn't just use RingCT, it uses something called stealth addresses and RingCT and ring signatures and all those kind of work together to create a what we consider and what we hope is a robust way of doing privacy. I kind of lost my train of thought sorry… So Monero does things in this way different from ZCash. It's a common misconception that Monero doesn't use any sort of zero knowledge. Remember zero knowledge proof just mean that you can prove a certain thing about a statement without revealing something. So as an example a ring signature is a form of zero knowledge proof, because the ring signature can say we don't know who the sender is, and how do we obfuscate the sender by saying it could be one of many possible senders, but we can prove that it was indeed one of these senders without knowing exactly which sender it was, and in that way we try to obfuscate who the sender actually is. So really does that kind of answer your question? Yeah? Okay.

How much time have I burned? Remember, 30 minutes we're at 5:18 and we're still not ready, but we're closer than ever before. Does anybody else have a question, Monero related question, a CDC related question to me? Because if not I'm gonna have to start telling bad jokes, and that nobody wants to hear my jokes. Ten minute break he says. Okay. So great, I can get off this stage, thank you guys so much for listening to me ramble, we're going to take a 10-minute break and then we're gonna come back, and we're going to start introducing, we're gonna start introducing all of the other assemblies in our cluster, and we've got a lot of them, so stick around, we've got some good stuff coming up and I'll see you guys around.
