# Mario Behling

_**Critical Decentralisation Cluster 36c3 - Open Hardware developed at FOSSASIA (Mario Behling)**_

[youtu.be/MhZcKLxdG1A](https://youtu.be/MhZcKLxdG1A)

_**Abstract**_

In this interactive session we will introduce Open Hardware projects at FOSSASIA and share experience developing a project from the idea stage to market. Projects discussed include Pocket Science Lab, Neurolab, Badge Magic and more.

_**Transcription**_

_Diego:_ I'm going to actually hand this directly off to Mario from FOSSASIA, he's going to be talking with you guys about all the great things that they're doing. They are located back there with the red tablecloth. Mario go ahead and tell us although awesome things that you guys do in the FOSSASIA.

_Mario:_ Thank you very much. So, hello guys, and the slides are coming up in a moment as well. So, my name is Mario, I'm here from Germany, and many years I was based in Asia, in Vietnam and in Singapore, been to China many times, been to Taiwan, so we are international community and based out of Asia, but like working with people all around the world. And we felt that free and open source solutions need to real push in around the world. So we said like: “Let's call our community and our organization FOSSASIA”.

So, let me talk a little bit about the hardware projects that we do. So, we exist for 10 years and started in 2009, and originally it was a lot about software, but in this talk now I want to talk about hardware which is like the big topic here, in this cluster, and there's so much a great overlap and with all these projects here, and so many interesting conversations that we want to engage in, and yeah let's have this session here in part of this.

So, open hardware what are we doing. Let me introduce you three projects that we are doing. For example we're doing the Pocket Science Lab. Who has heard about the pocket science lab before? Pocket Science Lab? Yeah, a few people. Ok, great. But like actually most of it still don't know it. And so the Pocket Science Lab is a measuring device, and our idea is to have a device that scientists and students, and people working with microelectronics can use to measure stuff. So it has a lot of useful control and measurement tools and integrated components that can be used by pins, and we have different apps. So here for example you see the different pins that you can use to plug in and do some measurements.

I will go into detail and now more here. For example, so how it works. Ah, they told me you to stay out of light, ok. So how it works. We have for example a mobile app, but you could also have a desktop app, so you have the mobile app and you connect the mobile app to our hardware and via USB for example, but you could also use an ESP chip, solder it to the device or you could use Bluetooth, but the standard way is the USB. And the USB then also powers the device, and here you see these small pins, and these small pins you can use then to measure or you can extend them with sensors or with small electronics. So, one way what we have done here on the screen is the mobile app screenshot so you have a lot of different components here on the screen.

So, yeah, let me show a little bit what we do recently, for example, what we developed. We extended all these small instruments on the app with map features, so you can now say: “Ok, I did this measurement at a special location”, and for example you can share your measurement with your friends, with other students or so on. And you can then say: “Ok, show me all the measurements that we did on a map”. So, by the way it's also written we have two different flavors, I know there are at this conference they are always a lot of fans of free and open source, and of course we love Fdroid, so we're really proud that we also support the Fdroid Store here and that we run with OpenStreetMap on the Fdroid Store. That's really cool.

Yeah, and here like a few more details for example of the oscilloscope. Who needs an oscilloscope, who likes oscilloscopes? Yeah? Oh, I see the majority raising their hands. This is always the thing that everyone wants. They want an oscilloscope. So, oscilloscope you can try it out, we have four different channels, you can also like install the app right away, and even if you don't have the hardware and you can for example use the microphone of the mobile phone and try out and sing into the microphone and then you can see the different waves from singing. So, that's very nice and, yeah, has all the basic features of an oscilloscope. By the way there's a QR code, if you want to try it out, can get it right away. Then yeah built-in mic, what I just mentioned, just click on it and then you can use it and see what's going on.

Another things that we have now. So, we have all these instruments on the app. So, for example we have a lux meter, we have a barometer, you have all the measurements even have a robotic arm, a lot of instruments. But the next step is that we want the device to be used as a data logger. So you can basically configure the device — and I think it's a good time to give around the board that we have, I know you people are always like haptic touching, yes, so I give around the device, you can have a look at the board — so, yeah, so the idea is now that we use the mobile phone, we connect the mobile phone to the board, to the device, and there should be like a small battery connected to the device, small or big like, you know, as long as you need it, and then you can basically say for example: “Measure every 10 minutes a certain data set”, yeah. And the device could be used as a data logger, you could distribute many devices and come back to the device, or access it through Wi-Fi and then like collect a lot of data. So that's the next steps and we are like improving this here more and more.

Ok, next thing I already mentioned — robots. Yeah, that was an idea I didn't have. A community member, I think it was even one of the workshops here that we did last year, he said: “Oh, why don't you use it to control robots?” Yeah, and that's really nice. So you can basically use these pins with cables, and you see here, on the robot there are these small motors, so these small motors they only cost $1 each engine, you can get it on you know the Chinese stores, and they are not like super great, but like they're good enough for us. So for $1 you can get a motor, and you can build a robotic arm. So basically like for example you can have 4 robots, motors, so you have a robot motors, and these motors are always 360 degrees in an angle, so you can actually say: “Make it 45, make it 90 degrees, 180 degrees”, any degree you could tell it, and then what you do is you configure the degrees here, and you drag and drop it into the line that you want to have the change. So one, two, three, four, five, six — what does it stand for, it stands for seconds. Who did video editing before? Video editing. Yeah, so I see, yeah a few people. So in the video editing you always have the timeline, yeah, and you can drag and drop into a timeline. So what you can do here is you drag and drop the angle that you want into a timeline, and this is a very easy way to control robot, and you can then just like extend the timeline more and more, and in the future you could imagine upload an algorithm, download like certain movements or so, alright, and you could share it I mean a lot of ways to develop this idea further, but like for now it is really a big change because people would say: “Wow! A robot! Oh, this is the future!” and this is like advanced and so on, but actually it's quite simple right? I mean you just control a motor and you control the angle of the motor, and then you just have a lot of motors, and you control the angles, and this is how a robot moves. So once people understand this idea they say: “Wow! I can do that!” Right? And like more and more people can engage and we hope to show this with this idea. The computer went out and… Ok, yeah, back again. That's great. So yeah, by the way if you want to try this out, this Pocket Science Lab, we have two workshops there behind, and you can just like go there and check out what you can do. And this is a hacker congress, so please don't expect everything to always work in detail, for example the oscilloscope that we have, that's already pretty well developed, other components are work in progress. So we're looking forward to your feedback and to your issues and reports.

And now let me go a little bit also to the desktop app. So the desktop app was completely rewritten in this summer, and we used Python and electron and web technologies basically, and our goal is to make the desktop app look very similar to the Android app. Ok, now people say: “Oh yeah, but desktop is so different, it's a completely different way of working with user interface,” and so on. However our goal is also to provide these tools for schools. So in the schools if you tell the teacher one student has an app for example an Android, the other uses this on desktop, and in the future maybe we have an iOS app, and every user interface looks different, it makes it difficult for the teacher. So let's try to make all the user interfaces as similar as possible and also make it compatible. So if I store something, if I collect data on the Android app, I should be able to download this data and like continue for example to view it or like, you know, research into it on the desktop app. So everything is compatible is just a simple CSV file that you can export and import on whatever app you are.

Ok, so we already have the logic analyzer as well multimeter, robotic arm — it's all on the desktop as well. Cool.

And yeah PSlab is one project, and I said I will talk about three projects here in this session. So the next project that we're doing is the Badge Magic project, yeah. I mean you see I have it here, people always like it, it's not as deep techs as the Pocket Science Lab, right, like where you need to know about physics and this or that. It's more like cool, right, I mean like bling-bling, there is some light, people like it, and if it's open source everyone say: “It's cool, I want to have it.” So let me tell you what is the state of this project. Or let me tell you first like what it does, right. I mean like you can see it here, the Badge Magic, LED badge here, and so basically the ideas to have a hardware, and the hardware is controlled through Bluetooth, they are like all the models on the market where you can control everything through USB, but like our thing was like: “Wow! This is Bluetooth, this is cool.” And it's Bluetooth low energy, so you don't even need to pair it, you just open the app and yeah you go about and do some things.

So yeah they are there is an app on the market already, and you can download it on the App Store, here again the QR code. So how it works is you charge this device through a USB cable again and then you can control it and change it through Bluetooth.

And yeah of course it's open-source, and what we have is a clipart and drawings, but let me go back in the story. This story is that we found this in China, and we said: “This is cool”, and we really like it. But we found it with this app that you see here. And yeah that some things are in Chinese, some things don't work as we want, we can't change it, and actually this app has a lot of downloads, so it seems like a lot of people buy these kind of badges, but it's not open source, we can't really change it. It's also different colors which is confusing, because the badge has only one color. So right you never know how it really looks, like there's no real proper preview, things like that. So a lot of things that we wanted and we couldn't change it.

So there was this guy here, and his nickname is nilhcem yeah. And he said like: “Yeah, I also don't like that, that it's closed source. I want to know and understand how it's working.” So he actually did research on this, he reverse engineered the communication between the different devices, between the phone and the Bluetooth badge. So yeah that was pretty cool, and he brought it on online, he shared his knowledge, and so that's his GitHub repository then where he released his sample implementation. And we thought: “Oh, that is really cool, now we found a good hack,” right. It is a hacker congress, so it's good to share this here.

And yeah thank you very much for doing this good things and for enabling us to do this, because now what we could do in the next step, we could develop a real full-fledged app with our community, yeah. And we're organizing a lot of events in Asia, we have the biggest open source conference in Singapore every year for example. So sometimes it's just like that easy — you put out an idea and people come and join, right. I mean not always that easy. It's easier for Android projects, it’s easier for web front-ends, it's more difficult for like really the deep stuff right. But like that's an Android app and we already had a goodie here hacking it. And yeah we shared it with FOSSASIA community, and people just flock to, it was a side project, and they did it.

So now we have this app, and yeah we can do many different things, of course, we can control the speed, we can control animation and different effects, and it's on Google Play, it's on Fdroid, and you can just download it and try it out.

What we have added in the last few months is, so you can now export badges, yeah also something that you couldn't do before, so right. I mean you have a real cool badge, and now you want all your friends to have the same badge, you go to a conference and you say: “Yeah, we are the guys from you know Namecoin,” and bling-bling, and it's really nice effects, and it looks cool. So yeah let's do it. So you can now do this, you can store it and you can simply share it, and share your badge configuration.

Then the other thing is like you say: “Ok, so we have this cool clipart and this cool icon, so how can we move this over there?” So now what you can do is you can just draw it. For example, there are more cool things that you can do in future, but for now what you can do is you can draw it. So you can actually go to the app, you find on the sidebar the draw functionality, and you draw what you want to have. And you click ‘Save’ and you can have it on the badge whatever you draw. Ok that was really cool and that's something that no other app has so far.

Ok and of course like as you can imagine: lots of different Android phones, lots of different resolutions and so on, so lots of bags to fix. And yeah that's kind of an advantage of being on a Store — you get all these like crash reports and so on. So a lot of things for us to fix, and interestingly, like because, like the group of people who worked originally on this device were all like people using the Latin alphabet, for example, in Vietnam, India, in Malaysia, Singapore and so on. And not so many people actually from China, because the China people say: “We already have a lot of Chinese apps.” But then we realized later — actually in our app Chinese wasn't supported, yeah. So that was kind of a funny thing, which we then did also over the last few months, so support of Chinese languages, support of non-latin scripts, for example, in India.

Cool. That's soft and what's this year, there's a B missing, so the Badge Android and Badge Magic, of course, it's on our repositories, and you can join the GitHub channels, you just have to log in with your GitHub ID. So no additional registration required, and GitHub also open source, so that's ok for us.

And another thing that we are always doing in the FOSSASIA community — we make contests. So we make events and we say: “Hey, want to come to our events?” — we actually want to connect to contributors, but like we don't want to have this huge process where we say: “Oh yeah, are you a good contributor or not? Have you done changes only in the readme file or have you really done some good code changes?” And so it's all like we don't want to have this top-down approach. So what we're doing is we do contests, and we have the winners of our previous years, and like other people like in the core teams be the Mentors, so we've huge mentor list, and we do these contests, and then people flock to the projects and do contributions, and the goal is, of course, we have long term contributions, as you know these days people have all kinds of good opportunities, they have these opportunities here with yeah the crypto technology, coin technology, they get all good job offers, so we constantly need like new people also in our community, to train them and then like to grow the projects on. Ok, so Codeheat Contest maybe also something for some of you guys, by the way it's still up until the 1st of February. So if you want to join — main prize is fly to our Singapore event in March, yeah. So these are three main prizes are pretty nice and people like it.

Ok. So about this project now. What's next? Of course, always talk to us, it’s in every project: in getting started with Android, this is a really good project to start with Android. Of course we want to add more devices and a lot of people came there and said: “We have this small fan..” You see this, I don't know it's like difficult to take a really good picture, but they have this small POV, like the small fan, right, and I put it there to grab the people's attention, and because what I want is — I want our app to support more devices: bigger screens, support fans and so on. These more fans have an LED, don't know if you can see that here, they have an LED, and that's how they project and turn around like some text. And there are really big ones in China that you can find. I really like them, I really want to have them, but I'm not so motivated if I don't have a free and open-source app, yeah. And to make the app is maybe not always so difficult, but somebody has to sit down maybe for one or two weeks and really like check out what is the, you know, what's the protocol or what's the communication of the closed-source proprietary app that is available today, and with the device, and after that we can really move on and develop more. And yeah opening up the Badge Hardware, any hardware — people here hardware electronics people here, so maybe we can talk about that if you would be interested in a small project — so we have two kinds of people — one kind of people say: “Oh this project is too easy, it's too boring for me. I don't want to make this kind of badge.” And the other kind of people say: “Oh I'm just a beginner. I don't know yet how to do it.” So yeah, we are looking for the right person to really like also make these badges completely open and produce the badge itself openly as well. And yeah, why not. And of course making a firmware is part of that.

Ok, and now the last project. How much time I have I left? So yeah, a few minutes left. So last project I want to introduce to you, thank you, it's the NeuroLab project. And so the NeuroLab project is now something else, maybe you guys have heard about open BCI, Brain Computer Interface, BCI right. And there's another project Brain DNO, for example. And yeah, so Open BCI is pretty cool, they have different devices, we also attach with them. But the devices are not always so cheap, it's quite expensive right — can go up to like five, six, seven thousand dollars and that's cool. And the Brain DNO device, we haven't seen so much development on the open source parts, and we also know those guys they were doing awesome work, they're doing all kinds of things, and so we a lot inspired by them, and there's also a lot of overlap of previous codes. But in the mean time actually we developed this project further. So let me go back a step for anyone who doesn't know about NeuroLab or neuro. So basically in Neuro is for brain right, brain computer interface, and what you can do for example, have sensors here or even have them all around your head, and then try to collect the brainwaves yeah. And the challenge is that these brain waves use like electrical, right, like as you know like this some kind electrical… how do you call English current… or electrical signal, right, so in your brain, but it's really weak yeah. So you can't just like get all the data like: let's download everything that's going on. So you really need sensitive hardware and yeah so that's the challenge right. And of course if we have like a lot of money and really sensitive hardware, and we can do something for 30 000 euros, the challenge is to do something for 200, yeah. So that's what we want to achieve with this project and we're advancing with this project.

So and again, we want to open things up. So what you see here, for example, is an Android screen, and right I mean like if I tell you 1995, do you want the telephone where you can order a like we can own a cab, or you can connect with people, or we can send a photo, and one would say yes, but people think a bit like 1995 they think they would send it somehow, or the app would called somebody, and then somebody picks up the phone zone 1995, people don't think like today, right I mean it's like actually just 15 years ago… longer… time passes… oh my god… 2019 yeah, so right I mean right 20 plus years ago so things happen, and so what I mean, is the point I want to make is this once you have a device that can collect brainwaves in the reach of a lot of people, once people can connect with this device through the mobile phone, people will come up with a lot of ideas that we cannot even imagine today. So now my question is this: do you want this kind of technology to be in the hands of Google and Amazon, and like completely closed source, and send your brain data to them? You already even you don't have the Android phone, I'm sure every one of us is sending their data already, because your friends have stored your information on their Google Calendar, on their Google Contacts and so on. And I'm you know I'm doing it myself, but like do we want them to continue in that way and to control us? No, no. We want to be in charge, we want to be in charge and ok, Google can use this technology, but this technology must be open at least, it must be accessible. We should be able to set it up just like I'm able to set up my own email server — I can do it, I have the option, I'm not dependent right. So this is the whole idea. And yeah, of course, they're cool things to do it, so I can rent a lot about the freedom and all these kind of things, but let's also focus like people want to do something cool. So what we can do cool things with it is for example we can do some games yeah. So we can have focus games, we can have relaxed meditation, we can observe our memories, or doctors for example all over the world could collect data and they could collect the memory graph and so on.

So this is what we are working on here, yeah, a few screenshots. But I tell you this project still very early stage, even though we do it for a few years, still early stage, but here for example you see the memory graph — you can collect the brainwaves, you can try to interpret it — there is actually a lot of open data available that University's collected, you can import it for example in the app, view it, and you can yeah use different kind of spectrum analysis to check how your brain waves are, and you will see, for example, people always tell me: “Oh yeah, maybe people think differently all over the world.” And yet people have all kinds of ideas how differently we are, but like what I see so far is actually or pretty similar, we are pretty much the same like if you focus — you focus, and it doesn't matter if you are from China or if you're from Germany, or from Canada — you focus yeah. And it's pretty similar. But of course maybe there are differences, and if you guys have access to the technology you can maybe find this differences, and we could control in future just like with speech recognition, we can control the same thing through our brain maybe, right, I mean trying these things and so on. So, do you want us as a community to be able to do that or just a few companies? I think the answer is pretty cool.

But what is the cool thing we can do, what works now, is for example, here focus and relaxation app. So you see this it's kind of a spaceship, yeah, that's flying just above a planet, and if you focus, if you really say: “Yes, spaceship go up,” this spaceship will go up and fly faster, and if you'll relax, you can try to relax, and then the spaceship will go slow and sit down.

Ok, so yeah, these are few ideas we are developing, oh, he's even in an animation piece, and NeuroLab is connected, and of course, always this idea, so we have this idea — import/export data make people available and make the data that people collect available, give them the power to do whatever they want, yeah. So this is this is always the idea, that's always possible with whatever we do. So here you actually see this going up and down.

Ok and then use it as a data logger, yeah, I mean like let people go around and collect this data. And what you usually see in Germany is a lot of discussion about: “Oh, is this secure, is this safe? Do I really want to do this? Should be rather not do this?” Or so. Well, I have to say these kind of things will happen anyways, but my question is — should we make it happen or should we leave it to others. I rather say we stay in control.

Of course, the meditation possibilities. So this is what we're working on. If you travel, for example, how do I meditate — it could be a sound feedback and so on, and the sound could adapt according to your brainwaves and so on. So yeah, here a few screenshots, so it's all work in progress, and a few more screen.

So a lot of ideas and if you have any feedback, please come to me and talk to me. So, and this is the end of the presentation, and I have to say this is just a small part of what we are doing. We are a mainly a software community, we have more than 4000 people registered on our GitHub, but you know how it is with big numbers — people come, people go, they don't unregister once they registered, so we always need new people, we always need to engage with more people. And yeah, we really want to get people into our projects, like we've also started a company with other community members in Singapore, and we've started another company for Europe, in Berlin, and yeah this company is now part of a New Horizon 2020 project, we work together with communities and social enterprises all over Europe, as well as with University, for example TU Berlin, and so on, because our goal is really to make open hardware mainstream. We don't just want it to sit as a hacker thing on the edge, I want my parents to use it, for example, and my father is a as a you know like many old people — they have thickness when they get older and, you know, they forget things and so on, so you know maybe if we could analyze this 20 years before, and it's possible with our apps, for example, then you know, it could help people. And I don't want to leave this to some big companies, we can collaborate, but like you know I want to us to be in charge, and this is a yeah one thing that we will have to do with OpenTech in Germany and FOSSASIA in Singapore. We are a community, but we're also social enterprises — we do not do software, but our goal is to really make hardware and open source software, open hardware to open source software, and really mainstream build sustainable models around it, and you know I mean it's topic here — sustainability, you can, everyone can repair it all these topics, but for me sustainability also means that developers can earn an income. We see a lot of developers that we trained now work at Google, now work at Facebook, buy their contracts — they are not able to contribute back yeah. And we want to change the entire ecosystem and that's why it's so great to be here at the Decentralization Cluster together with the crypto community, with a coin community, and yeah we're really grateful that we can be part of this year. And I want to close my talk with saying — thank you to all the volunteers and thank you to everyone who makes it happen and to Tim and Mattias, where are you, yeah, so right, yeah, and thank you very much so it's really great starting to the event, and good to be here. Thank you.

_Diego:_ Thank you very much, Mario. Man this is why I love open-source man — there's just such air of humility about it, that is, we don't have all the, I mean we have ideas, but we may not have all the best ideas. So we want to release the tools that we're making. So other people with good ideas can go ahead and do that. It takes a lot of humility to say that I don't have all the best ideas, and I personally don't have the humility to do that yet.
