# dllud, Denis 'GNUtoo' Carikli

_**Critical Decentralisation Cluster 36c3 - Introduction to Replicant (dllud, Denis 'GNUtoo' Carikli)**_

[youtu.be/ex48GI9YW_A](https://youtu.be/ex48GI9YW_A)

_**Abstract**_

Replicant is a fully free Android distribution that is approved by the FSF. This short talk will briefly explain: why Replicant came into being; the freedom, privacy and security issues it has found in devices aimed to run Android; and the approaches that it follows to liberate such Android devices.

_**Transcription**_

_Diego:_ Okay, we got more. You guys thought we were gonna stop you, thought we were ready for bed… No! The fun never stops here. At the goodness, I'm so tired. What is the name of this thing? Critical Decentralization Cluster. The fun never stops here. Okay, next up we've got Dennis, he's gonna be talking with us about Replicant, which I don't want, I mean, I don't want to say anything, but that little red android logo, it's kind of cute, and it may give you a little bit of a hint as to what they do. But I'm gonna let him explain that for himself. Let's go ahead and give Dennis a hand. I actually don't think he's supposed to start and for five minutes, so maybe we can give him a hand for five minutes. I'm just kidding, well go ahead and I give him the mic now.

_Denis:_ So Replicant is a fully free Android distribution. So the website is replicant.us we are owned since 2009. We are currently based on LineageOS and we have like no less know our current release is based on Android 6, so unfortunately there are no more security update for two years now, so we are working on porting on Android 9, but the work is still on progress because there's a lot of change between the two versions. So it supports about ten devices, we will see that later, and we have about like two people working full times, so it's like one person full-time and two as of half time, and a lot of contribution from the community that comes and go depending on the availability of time basically.

So this is the device which support, the quite old, it's like Galaxies s2, s3, Galaxy Nexus, not one or two, and some tablets like Galaxy Note 8.0 and Galaxy Tab 2.

So it's a best efforts. So we try to make it to make the basic work, like I don't know for smartphones, calls, sounds and things like that. But for instance if the GPS doesn't work we still support the device and that's fine for us. This is how we can make it work basically with being fully free software.

So the issue is that like the distribution itself is fully free, this means we ship no binary blobs, nothing proprietary, but this doesn't mean that the hardware is okay or the software that is already in the hardware is okay. So this is a code for malicious men, we are going to look into it. So we have lot of freedom issues.

So this is a Galaxy S3. So this is a system on a chip, it's the chip with main CPU, graphic on, SD card control on a lot of stuff in the same chip, not necessarily everything like for instance you have the Wi-Fi account somewhere yeah and don't remember which chip, so some of the stuff is not in the same chip, and you have also in this phone a separate modem, here. So it's a another chip that communicate with cell phone tower here, so if you have, you need to make a call for instance you digit the number or something like that in the graphical user interface in Android, so that's one by a processor in this chip that askes those are chip that has its own OS, and so on to do the call, to place the call, and you also have like process on SIM-card, I think there is a talk at this CCC about SIM-cards. And the other architecture is interesting for freedom, privacy and so on, because for instance here it's connected the modem in the system on a chip are connected through something that looks like USB, it's a subset of USB, so this mean that there is no shared memory and modem cannot attack the main CPU through memory, it could maybe appears like a key bone, but in this case we know about it, because the host, the main processor of control the USB enumeration, so you cannot like out of nowhere open like key bone basically.

So a lot of freedom issues. You have the network that know where you are like 10-20 meters accuracy all the time when your phone is connected to the network. So this is part of the protocol, the modem firmware has as its own OS, and it's completely non free, so we can trust it, and we can change anything inside it. You have many other nonfree firmware like fine sense Wi-Fi, Bluetooth depending on the model, video decoding acceleration things like that. Another issue is bootloaders. So it's the equivalent of the BIOS and grab in one binary basically. So this is typically signed, it means that the manufacturer of the device burned the rush of a key inside the system on and chip, inside this one, and then in when loading the bootloader from an external media like a SD card or MMC it will check the signatures, so in most of our smartphones, maybe five or ten, it's not the case, but in two of them is a sign, so it's good it's a big issue for us. And for instance on many of them it's also low the second operating system alongside the Android distribution, so it's zone called TrustZone it's like you have a user space, kernel space, and TrustZone, so you have another always running on the same CPU with more advanced privileges. So this is not good either. And since we are based on Android and yeah the code is huge and sometimes upstream anti-features that we don't fond like, I don't know, I think it's line address that I did the feature where if you want to, if you have a college, we'll look up the phone number that call you in through services online, so it will send the number you call or that are calling you through service like reverse name lookup, something not so, yeah we have to find this, and remove this also

So if you have a tablet without modem obviously you don't have the issue of the modem, and on the device we support we added recently a feature to like disabled oh modem by not loading the modem operating system, since it's up to us to load it in that kind of architecture, in the phone we support, we have control over it, so we can decide not to do it. So obviously you don't have call and things like that, mmm at least not through modem if you do it.

So for instance if we look at LineageOS it's the same we are currently based off, so the modem on some device can take the control of the full system, you have like nonfree libraries that talk to do, and well like for instance to make the modem work you have a library that stalks, that implement the modem protocol, and some you know backdoor was found for instance in one for some Samsung devices. So we didn't implement the backdoor in that case, and you have the anti-features I talked about, but although hardware works, for instance, we don't have GPS working on any of the device we support. So we have tradeoff in worst cases.

So this is for stock device you buy off the shelf, so you might have an Android that's fully non free but the Linux channel thanks to the license. The manufacturer is like his needs to release the source code to the people that buy the devices. So in some cases users are completely locked out of their devices, if you buy through an operator, the device is linked to an operator, you cannot even like boot it or install another operating system on it. So yeah and sometimes you have like even like unwanted applications, buying application being already pre-installed and things like that, but you still left with the ability to install the application you want like Android or the office application for instance, so it's not as bad as an iPhone 4 or in other phone for instance.

So yeah, and this is why guys record like that, and yeah we also add like we also have mass surveillance than USSR today. So yeah.

So why we are based on Android, and the thing is that the graphical user interface it works with device that don't have a keep on, have a small screen, with high pixel density, and work with capacitive display, and that works with big fingers, so you need to adapt although eyes, the graphical interface and the application for that, and that's already done for Android, for Linux, I think, it's a work in progress right now. So yeah and issue is that as I said huge code base, and Android is meant to run proprietary software, not to empower users, so that's not fully aligned with goals here, but… And some of the architecture is way better on GNU/Linux, like the package manager and like the build system are better on Linux so yeah…

So this is what we are currently working on right now. So we are porting Replicant to Android 9, it's a lot of work there, we'll talk about this tomorrow. And making smartphone sustainable and Replicant sustainable. So we are using like mainline canal or canal based on mainline Linux for that, so it's a huge change. We will try to support like PinePhone and Librem5, but this is like best effort, like if people show up to do it and at the time it will be done, but we are very interested into doing it. And we're also working in new release, we have to like fix bugs like some SIM cards are not recognized, and application compatibility, we're being, we are fixing it because we don't have like 3D acceleration right now, so the OpenGL we used was incomplete, so this is being fixed. So we have freedom issue like F-Droid, the all the things that are in F-Droid not necessarily compliant with GNU NFS distribution guidelines, so we have to fix that. We have also a talk about issue with WebView and build system at the CCC, so yeah. We are also working on understanding if it's possible to get like free software bootloaders on the devices we already support like Galaxy S3, but it's difficult to know. So there is a project called XBOOT which has, which claims to be able to run as first stage bootloader, so we need to see if we can execute code and if it's cut is running on the device we support. So we don't have any conclusive answer yet, and as many other projects we also have the work to do for presentation, documentation, infrastructure because we own all part of our own infrastructure and one to one more. So yeah, that's it, is there any question or time left for questions? Five minutes for questions. Any questions? Yeah maybe next week, oh if there are no questions yeah…

_Diego:_ Right thank you very much. Give Denise a hand. Exit stage right, that's all right, okay…
