# Drew Fustini

_**Critical Decentralisation Cluster 36c3 - Open Source Hardware and OSHWA (Drew Fustini)**_

[youtu.be/aGZnkSGVIhU](https://youtu.be/aGZnkSGVIhU)

_**Abstract**_

Introduction to Open Source Hardware (OSHW) including the Open Source Hardware Association (OSHWA), certified OSHW, and the Open Hardware Summit.

_**Transcription**_

_Diego:_ I can stop beatboxing. And we are back, live from Los Angeles, California. No wait, no, we are in, we are alive from Germany. That's why I feel so tired, because the jet lag. You're gonna get tired of that jet lag before this day is over, my goodness. But we have more content we have got Drew here from OSHWA. How does it feel to be here Drew?

_Drew:_ Exciting just got here like…

_Diego:_ That's really nice, thank you so much. No I'm gonna let you finish but, no. Ok, so we are going to pass this off to him, he's going to tell us about OSHWA which is the open source hardware, that's it. That's just open source hardware — the A is silent, it doesn't stand for anything. So Drew take us away.

_Drew:_ Hi, my name is Drew Fustini, I want to talk about open source hardware and the Open Source Hardware Association with ias is also part of the Association, so wanted to represent that here. I have some links in the slide, so this is the URL, if you want to pull them off at GitHub. I messed up uploading them to the submission website, so I'll redo that once I'm done.

So I design open source hardware projects for a circuit board manufacturing service called OSH Park, also part of the BeagleBoard.org Foundation. We make open source hardware Linux computers, and then I'm part of the Board of Directors for the Open Source Hardware Association, which is what I'm going to talk about today.

So probably most people at this event have heard of open source, so examples of popular open-source: Android, Linux Libre Office, Firefox Apache. And the term “open source” refers to something that people can modify and share because this design is publicly accessible. In open source software allows you to inspect, modify and enhance that software. There's also the term “free software” which comes from a more philosophical perspective, which is about these four freedoms.

So when it comes to hardware, I'm gonna refer to open source hardware as a term to be inclusive of Free, Libre and Open Source hardware. Some people use different terms, but I'm just gonna use the term “open source hardware” here to refer to that. So the statement of principles for open source hardware as we define it is: “hardware's whose design is made publicly available so that anyone can study, modify, distribute, make and sell the design or hardware based on that design. So for electronics which is mostly what I work on that would be sharing the design files for your electronics which would include the schematic, the board layout, the bill of materials. And we're not just talking about an output file like a PDF or a PNG, but about the editable source files. So if you're using KiCad, the KiCad files or the EAGLE files, and then in terms of the bill of materials, one thing that's good to keep in mind is making sure all the components in your project are available in low quantity.

So what's an example of open source hardware that many people have probably heard of or do we know. How many people have heard of Arduino before here? Ok, so a good chunk of you. So Arduino was a board that was designed in a small school in Italy and probably most people would never heard of it if this was not released as an open source hardware project. And it achieved critical mass because they shared the hardware, and they shared the source code, and it was good enough to do a lot of projects at the time. There's a cool documentary on that, you can check out if you search for it on YouTube or Vimeo from back in the day when Arduino started. So Arduino is open source hardware, so how do we know that the Arduino is open source hardware — we can go to the Arduino website and we can download the EAGLE design files for it with hardware schematic and the board layout.

So when we publish the design files for open source hardware project, we need to use an open source license. So there's several different options here: there's the Creative Commons Share-Alike, such as like the… well creative commons this is a suite of licenses, some of which are open source licenses, so the Creative Commons BY-SA means attribution and then share-alike. One thing to keep in mind here is there is a non-commercial attribute, and if you use the non-commercial attribute that makes it not open-source. There's a good blog post on that link there, if you download the slides that goes into why this is the case. You can also use Copyleft or reciprocal licenses like GPLv2 or v3. You can also use permissive licenses like Apache, BSD, MIT. There's also licenses that were created specifically for open source hardware: CERN has created something called the Open Hardware License which I wanted to talk about here.

So CERN started off with something called the Open Hardware Repository where they are sharing a lot of the hardware that they were designing for the physics experiments, that they were building. And then they created a license to go along with that. There's great interview with Javier Serrano who leads this hardware team at CERN, and they helped create this Open Hardware Repository and the Open Hardware License.

So this thing kind of get complicated — all these different licenses, there's also trademarks and copyrights from the Open Hardware Summit back in 2014. Ari Douglas gave a really good overview of the different licenses and what might work for your project and what might not work for your projects, I recommend checking that out. But what is the point of all this. So the point of open source hardware is you want to enable collaborative development. So the reason why you would publish these files is you want other people to contribute to the hardware design of your project. And if you're just doing it to kind of check a box you know or add a keyword to your crowdfunding campaign, it's probably not the right thing for you. The point of all this the reason why you publish your files is you want to let people to participate in the development.

So I'm part of the Board of Directors for the Open Source Hardware Association with ias is also on the current board. We're a 501(c)3 which is means it's a federal nonprofit organization in the US. And the website — one of the main things it does is it hosts the definition of what open-source hardware is. We also have some things like Best Practices, Quick Reference Guide, things that you may do for an open source hardware project, and things that you must do, and then also a Checklist if you want to check, to see if your project is open-source hardware.

And OSHWA came out of this event called the Open Hardware Summit which started in 2010, and we're gonna have the 10th one coming up in March in New York City on March 13th. So hopefully we'll see some of you there. And back in October we had an event called Open Hardware Month, which Mathias helped out a lot with. So we had people over the world to locally organized meet-ups and talks, and workshops about open hardware. Kicked off with some events in Vienna, in Colorado and then we had 40 events in 14 different countries across five continents back in October. So we'll be planning to do Open Hardware Month again in October of 2020, so hopefully we get more people involved next time. If you're curious about what happens at the Open Hardware Summit, all the videos are online from our previous one which was in 2018. We skipped this year to do the Open Hardware Month and then we'll be having in 2020.

So one of the things that the Open Source Hardware Association or OSHWA did was we created this certification program for open hardware. So some of you probably seen this gear logo there which is kind of an unofficial logo. It was created by a member of the community, it's great logo, I really like it a lot. But we wanted to create something that had a legal meaning behind it. So we created this open-source hardware a certified logo. So it's a self-certification program, so you can go to our website, you can go to oshwa.org, you can go on there and you can register your project as being open source hardware. Need to go in there and you fill out the form, you put in things like where your documentation is, what license you're using, description of what your project is. And kind of has a couple different uses: one is if you're a consumer or someone that's looking for a device, makes it really easy to identify if that device is open source hardware, because it'll have this logo on there, and if you're making a project and you want people to be able to easily identify that it is open source hardware, and then also where the design files are, if you see this logo you can go to certificate.oshwa.org and you can look up that number. So it'll be the two letter country code and then whatever the sequence was when it was registered, and you can look that up and find that like the design files and the documentation.

So if you're interested to find out more, we have a, you can join OSHWA as a member. If you're part of a company you can also join as a corporate member of OSHWA. We have a mailing list which I recommend getting on, we also have a forum website as well and then you can follow us on Twitter for the Open Hardware Summit, there's OHSummit. And the executive director of the association is Alicia Gibb and she wrote a book a few years ago called “Building Open Source Hardware” that has essays from several different people in the community about their experience with doing open hardware projects.

And we're almost out of time here. Do I take questions? Yeah, ok. I have some bonus slides about Linux. But let's take some questions first, if anyone has any questions. If not I'll talk about Linux. Ok, it doesn't look like we have any questions

So my two favorite things are open source hardware and Linux. So I thought I would throw in a few projects cuz we're talking about open hardware we should actually talk about some hardware right? So one of my favorite projects is called the Novena laptop which was actually created by Bunnie who gave a keynote this morning, which was really awesome, and Sean Cross who goes by xobs. So they wanted to create a laptop that was a hundred percent open-source. So this was probably I don't know maybe four or five years ago, which at the time they found they basically built the most open system they could, and they shared the design files for the board and the schematic, and everything. I'm a pretty decent performance at the time. In this cluster somewhere I believe is the reform laptop which I recommend you checking out. Lukas over there has a kind of the follow-up to this, Bunnie's off doing other things now, but Lucas is doing a really cool open hardware laptop called the Reform.

I mentioned BeagleBoard before. We make open hardware computer, a single, small single board computers that are all open hardware. And one of the things to note is because we're open hardware there's a bunch of different manufacturers, and there's BeagleBone with many different features and price points, which is kind of nice because if someone say: “Oh I take off the HDMI and put something else on there”, you can do that.

One of the other things I'd like to mention especially because we're in Europe, one a really great open-source hardware company is Olimex and they have a line of boards called OLinuXino, which is a great line of boards that are capable running Linux and there are a hundred percent open source. And in fact they are actually now designed with KiCad which is an open source free software, circuit board design software. So this board here the A64-OLinuXino came out a few years ago, and they designed it completely in KiCad and Tsvetan actually gave a talk at FOSDEM about the process of doing that. And I'll end on if you've not heard of it before I'm big fan of KiCad it's a free software, open source program for designing circuit boards. And actually if you're interested there's gonna be event called KiCad happening at CERN coming up this year. So look for that. Olimex also did a laptop that puts that A64 board into a laptop form factor.

I have a few more minutes I think or I don't know… Anyone have any questions?

_Audience:_ Yeah, how far we are from having a phone which is open source hardware?

_Drew:_ Yeah, this a very good question. I think there's a people that made attempts at that, you know, Librem has a phone that's coming out. The devkit they develop for that was open source hardware, but I don't think the actual phone is, so I could be wrong about that, but I think it would be great to see more progress in that area. I think consumer electronics are really hard because the development cycle is so quick that it almost doesn't benefit necessarily to have to collaborate with other people on something that's only gonna be existing for six months, but you know Bunnie talks about how like Moore's law is slowing down, and that was kind of idea what the Novena was I like, we can actually produce something that people will use maybe three four or five years from now, and in that case collaborating around a common design I think makes a lot of sense so. But I would definitely love to have an open hardware phone, so if anyone is interested in that I would love to maybe talk about possibilities with that. All right, thank you.
