# Juila Longtin

_**Critical Decentralisation Cluster 36c3 - ImplicitCAD (Juila Longtin)**_

[youtu.be/HBdejyomAF8](https://youtu.be/HBdejyomAF8)

_**Transcription**_

_Diego:_ There we go. There we go. Can you hear me? How's it going? Ok, so we are back everybody, we have even more content, and even more after this and after that, you guessed it, we have even more. So coming up, we've got Julia who's gonna be talking with us about ImplicitCAD, what is ImplicitCAD, if you're asking that question then that you're in the right place, because she's gonna let us know. So I'm gonna pass it off, let's give her a great big hand. Thank you.

_Julia:_ Hello, I'm Julia, I'm the one of the ImplicitCAD developers. So what ImplicitCAD is — is it is a 3D modeling system written in Haskell which I have been working on for the last four years. I took it over four years ago when it was in kind of a state of disarray, but we have since taken it too, since taking it a bit further down the path. So ImplicitCAD is kind of an OpenScadish language. If you've used 3D modeling tools before you've probably looked at an OpenSCAD code which is this you know it looks kind of like C but you produce objects with it. So it's got your traditional brackets and semicolons, and all that jazz that some people you know don't really like about C, but that is lay it is. So it's written in Haskell. So Haskell is a functional programming language and his has pure functions in it which makes a testing in the language… testing in the languages actually very useful and makes the product a little bit better.

Now why did I pick up ImplicitCAD and keep pushing it down the road. There are basically three reasons: ImplicitCAD is a GPL v3, so it is a 100% free software and is going to be a hundred percent free software for as long as there is free software. I think it's actually v3 plus so if RMS or somebody comes out with a new version of the a GPL it'll be fine. I'm a big advocate of since 3D printers are such a useful thing, they allow us to produce outside of manufacturing facilities or any of that kind of infrastructure, and being able to produce like that it allows the people to actually own our means of production. You can see around here people are driving around on little scooter and things that are halfway held together with 3D printed parts. And while the scooter may not be a hundred percent 3D printed, I'm sure somebody has something close to it here, but the pieces that actually hold those things together are usually our handy 3D print. Now Haskell as I said is a functional programming language, which is it's kind of my thing, I like functional programming languages, they allow me to express things in both the mathematic form and in a mathematic form and an imperative form. So parts of the program look a little bit like C programs in the sense that there's statements, after statements, after statements, but many of the pieces of ImplicitCAD are actually mathematic formulas on the inside. So ImplicitCAD internals of the engine are all basically a giant ray tracer, if you've played with ray tracing in the past, so it is a ray traced based system for coming up with 3D models.

Now as I've said before, ImplicitCAD is a programmatic language, so as you can see here you kind of this is the ImplicitCAD website — you can put in code on one side, literally just hit a button, and a piece of our server will split off and give you a 3D printed model. You don't have to install it because well installing Haskell sometimes can get very complicated. So we put together this website, it lets you just put something in, get an object out and then feed that directly to your 3D printer.

So I've been working on this for about four years now, and we've implemented a good system for testing. So we're using H SPEC tests everywhere, so every time that we make a release we know that everything that we've done before is actually tested. Additionally I'd been working on a on a slicer to go with it. When you 3D print you 3D print normally by putting down layer after layer after layer of plastic and ImplicitCAD is a modeling system, but by having a slicer that is written in the same sort of setup we get to well… it allows us to use better models inside the slicer, as well. The slicer is kind of a new thing, so it's still in progress. ImplicitCAD you can write an object and ImplicitCAD feed it to the slicer and then have something ready for your 3D printer to just go.

The website and all of that is here on the screen. You can just hit the website, put in information about the object you want to create, get out the object you're looking for. All the source code of all these utilities is a GBL v3, so get a hold of me or get hit the mailing list if you're interested in the project. Thank you. Questions? Yes, no, maybe, kind of, sort of? Thank you.

_Diego:_ Thank you very much, give you another hand. All right we are gonna take about a 10 minute break, we're tracking down a couple of people to get them up here. Go grab some food, go grab some life whatever it is — that is out there for you. Just be sure to come back!
