# Ome

_**Critical Decentralisation Cluster 36c3 - The Sharp Forks We Follow**_

[youtu.be/-k8RZ-GP-nU](https://youtu.be/-k8RZ-GP-nU)

_**Abstract**_

In this talk, we will discuss forks as human consensus failure modes, why they happen and their consequences. We will look at examples of forks in different social structures: from hunter-gatherer tribes and religious factions, to open source projects and, particularly, the cryptoeconomic protocols that enable decentralized infrastructure. We will cover the dynamics at play in forks from multiples angles: technical, economical, political, and theological.

_**Transcription**_

_Ome:_ So hello everyone I'm going to talk about the sharp forks we follow. And I'm calling them sharp because sometimes they are painful. For those of you that are familiar with the term “fork”, I'm going to also introduce it briefly for those who are not familiar with it. But I want to take a different, I don't want to take a very technical approach to it, I want to have a social take on what our forks, what are they good for, what are the dangers they have. We're gonna have cover some examples on how group of people split, and some example in the Bitcoin and Ethereum communities.

So first of all, myself — I'm a software engineer, I've been working in open-source for several years, and I've been working in crypto for three years now. And for me this topic, I got fascinated since I learn about the DAO hack and how the theorem blockchain splitting too. So this is my first attempt at trying to formalize a bunch of questions, and a bunch of five years and discussions that I've been having with people throughout these three years. So if something is not clear at the end, please I'll be very happy to receive your feedback and trying to make a nice talk with this and repeat it in the future. So every input will be appreciated.

So fork. So fork, I like to see it as a dispute resolution mechanism. So the word “fork” if we look at what it comes from, it can be it has many exceptions, but one of them is in a road, there is a another road that you can take, and then there are two. In software development projects what we'll refer as forks is you create a new branch and you start developing this new branch on your own independently of how the original team or the original offer was doing it. And in blockchain what we mean by “forks” is well it builds on the on this principle of open-source forks — that we are changing the source code that is implementing the protocol. And in the case of blockchains it's a bit more tricky, because it's not just the source code that is available for anyone to use. No. This source code need to be run by machines, and they're going to be providing some infrastructure that provides some features, and these features allow for transaction of economic value, so it becomes really tricky.

So I would like to expand first on what forks are in blockchain space, and specifically I want to focus on hardforks not softforks, and so to make the distinction between hardfork and a softfork. A softfork is a variation of the software that implements a protocol that is backwards compatible. So that means that some people in the network can still run the old version of the code and still be compatible with the new operation, new messages in the protocol. Well a hardfork means that some people in the community will be running a different version of the software that will not understand exactly what's going on if you run the other protocol. And that's why it's called “hard”. So if you are running this version you cannot talk to the other and then the blockchain splits into two chains of history of transactions. And in comparison again to software forks it's not… you can have two software forks and the difference is that, well, maybe you have a part of the community that is running node.js, and may for sometimes some people in the community decided that some aspects of how the development team was implementing new features in node.js and they fork off and they made io.js for sometime and then they merged again.

So being inside hardforks we can also look at different kind of hardforks, so some of the hardforks can be accidental. So maybe some nodes in the network are running faulty version of the software that doesn't implement correctly the protocol, and it has some breaking change that not everyone in the network can understand. So that effectively creates two chains in the blockchain, and the two parts of the network cannot speak to each other. It can also be that the community is conscious of what the changes are going to be so, they have some interest, there is some motivation behind why they want to change the protocol and the software that implements it. But the ones that I really want to focus on are those changes that are contentious, that means that part of the community don't agree with those changes and they will stay running a different version of the software, and some others will say: “Well, I really want this thing. I'm going to make the changes for myself. I'm going to start running it. And at the same time I'm going to convince other people to run this software as well, and I will be able to communicate with them and to have our own blockchain”.

So more generally what I wanted to focus on is forks, our dispute resolution mechanism, when there is a state of dissensus. That means that it's a group of people that don't agree on how things should change or how things should remain.

So if we look at open source projects traditionally, and even nowadays we you go to GitHub and you see that there is a fork button, you can fork you can make your own changes, it can be and you may do that because maybe the features that are available in the version of the main version of the software out there don't provide, and you may say: «Well, this is very common”, sometimes you have to fork working on a feature that you need, maybe you can propose and submit back into the main branch of the of the project. It can be about policies to be followed in a cryptocurrency network.

So in Bitcoin there have been lots of discussions about the block size, but there could be also in the future discussions about other parameters in the protocol, like the total supply of Bitcoin. So there is always going to be 21 million. Well this is a matter of people that are executing that software that implements that protocol that must agree that that's something desirable for them. But there can be also faults that are based about the principles that the decentralized infrastructure should follow. And this example is very clearly highlighted in the Ethereum fork. So after the DAO hack the Etherium blockchain split in two and one of the main fork today violated one of the core principles of blockchain which was immutability. So because a large portion of the community in the firm lost a significant amount of value, at the end they forgot, well the dispute got resolved by “Ok we can forget that this happened and now we can all agree that we didn't lose this money”. And this caused a bunch of people in the community to say: “Well no, we really wanted to stick to immutability and we are actually going to keep on mining on the chain that is keeping track of that fact”.

But then the forks can have multiple reasons. And here I want to I would like to look at what is it that first bring people together. So in the case of a firm what brings people to work together is because they maybe believe in the properties of the infrastructure or the possibilities that it enables. So its technological it can be political, economical or even theological because the notion of immutability well it didn't come with the universe like things are not immutable, things are constantly changing. But we try to believe that that was a possibility and some people decided to fight for that. It can be economical in the case of Bitcoin — people the community believed that there might be some good properties that come from having a total supply limited bounded to 21 million, and they will try and make that stay, or believe in that increasing the block size to 2 megabytes might have unintended consequences that will be harmful for them or for the community. Or political also if you think that by keeping a certain story among the community you will have some personal benefit or you will have some or some group of people will have some benefit, they will fight for that.

And here then I would like to go very quickly through some epic hardforks in history and not just limiting them to blockchain space, because I want to look at them from any kind of split between a group of people.

So we can start very simply with a group of friends that stop liking each other and they stop seeing each other, or a marriage that they don't stand each other and then they get divorced. Hunter-gatherer tribe that is wandering roaming the land and they are thirsty and they don't know where to go to fetch some water, and part of the of the tribe they say: “Well, we're gonna better go in that direction, hope we find water”. And the other one will say: “No, we're gonna shoot in that direction or hope we find water”. So they effectively split, take different paths. It can be a of religion, schism. So some people are believing that they have to pray to a god but not quite in the same way. So they get angry and they write a manifesto and they stick it on a church, and they rally other believers to do things in that way to interpret the scriptures in some way. Or a decaying empire that cannot keep the social order, and then different territories start having a different leader that propose how things should go. And this was the Roman Empire that splitting in the Western and the Eastern empires.

So as it was preparing for this talk and I was looking for definitions, I was actually very surprised to find that in English there are so many words to refer to how people split. So we have schism, secession, split, divide, now fork. So it seems to be something that is very common in human nature — we come together but we also take part that and take or journey apart.

I would like to also take a small detour on slicing the noosphere, because all of these I need to introduce these concepts. So what is the noosphere — the noosphere is the sphere of all ideas. So this field is an infinite space. So every idea can be copied and it's not preventing anyone from using that idea. This is a concept that I was introduced by Eric Raymond, assay from the “Cathedral and the bazaar”. So it's a an open source developer and open source advocate, and he was back in the 90s exploring the notion of property in open source. So he is proposing that a software is a collection of ideas that you can infinitely copy. But then if you can copy it infinitely what is it that make people choose one version of that copy. And sorry… So it's interesting because in open-source you have both abundance dynamics in which everyone can copy every idea and make it their own. You can go to GitHub click the button “copy”, have your own version of the software. But at the same time if you're going to install Debian you're not going to download it from any random fork that you find on the Internet, you're going to go to a trustworthy source of the distribution channel. You will check the PGP signature, you want to know what you're downloading, you are trusting the people that are curating the distribution or implementing Python interpreter you want, because let's be honest, we don't check that the code is doing exactly what we think it's going to do. So we are always outsourcing this trust to the maintainer of a project, to the maintainer of distribution, so… What I want to say here with a slicing the noosphere is that we're slicing something that is infinite, but people have to choose at the end which one of these variations of the protocols software or ideas are going to follow.

So there are some limitations here which is although we can infinitely fork projects and infinitely fork ideas, if we keep on doing infinitely, we may end up with as being the only user which sometimes that's desirable, but when we're talking about protocol forks and infrastructure, that is allowing for people to transmission value, then we cannot… it's not very useful if we have our own private blockchain with our own private protocol. So there is some limit as to how much we can split things also if we make the analogy with other social organizations, if you think of a tribe in the wilderness, maybe you can say: “Well, I don't like any of you. I'm gonna go my way”. But then you may not survive. So forking has a cost, and it seems like network effects made people sometimes not to be willing to fork, either because they are comfortable with what the community is providing or what the infrastructure is providing. And sometimes it's simply because it's too expensive to go along.

So the limits of forking. My intuition here is that when we make things easier to fork, what we are facilitating is for things to be centralized, because everyone can just take their own version of things and find rally a group of people that are going to agree with the initiator of the fork to maybe there is something good in what I am proposing. But at the same time if you keep forking you can go to market cap and see that most forks have very little value compared to the main fork, if you go to open-source forks you see that small forks have very little effort being invested in. So at the end people will go to the fork that is primarily followed. Which is also a case for how why not all things can be decentralized and this is this is my current intuition as to why we cannot fully decentralize, our attention cannot be fully decentralized, we tend to focalize on projects on people on ideas.

But what are they… so I'm missing one slide, sorry, but I wanted to talk also what are the main elements that make us choose one variation of a protocol or another or a set of ideas or another, or just everything that comes with them. So it can be trust, trust in the maintainer, the reputation of the developers that are pushing forward new features in the project. It can be the stability that it brings like in Bitcoin, you may not want to choose a fork because well it's been running for a while, most people are there, it's less likely that it's going to change rapidly, that provides some stability as to what the value of the currency is going to be. It can be about purity, it can be: “no no no, we really believe that things should be preserved, for posterity so we're going to keep mining on the fork”, that is keeping track of all transactions even though many people lost a lot of money with that. Or it can be just propagandistic reasons, maybe some group of people have very compelling way of telling a story, and then other people just follow along.

So just to finish I would like to have to study cases. One on a Ethereum versus Ethereum Classic, and another one between Bitcoin and Bitcoin Cash. So if we look at the Ethereum and Ethereum Classic, I just to give some context, so it happened after the DAO hack, this was a smart contract that proposed a system for giving grants for development of the Ethereum ecosystem, and everything was going well until someone found a problem in the smart contract that could siphon out the value in the contract, and then a lot of money went out. So then the solution was “ok, we can forget this happened” and have another version of the protocol that will patch the contract. So therefore in the community wouldn't have lost this money at the hands of hackers. There were also some discussions as to well if a Ethereum is marching towards proof-of-stake, if we don't do anything these hackers will have a significant stake in a future system, so we have do, we want to have people in this community that will have voting rights gained through means that we deem non ethical. But some people may say: “Well it's responsibility of each one of us that when we deploy a contract we should make sure that it work as expected and if it doesn't, well it's the price to pay for having such a system”. So the way I see this fork is that not only a big part of the community were interested in not losing value, it was also that the Ethereum foundation, and Vitalik proposed: “Well, we can we can do this, we can prevent the community from having this large loss. So we're going to make this change in the protocol. It's a hardfork, it's a breaking change, it's not going to be backwards compatible, if people want to keep mining in the other fork they will not be compatible with this fork”, and that effectively made a Ethereum to become two blockchains with two different currencies. I think it was a very technocratic and reputation based fork, because people look up to Vitalic as the person who created this blockchain, so if he was going to keep maintaining and developing in that fork it wasn't natural in my opinion that many people in the community decided to follow along with that fork. And it was also a theological fork because some people really believed that immutability was something worth defending even though their value by keeping the Ethereum Classic, and not selling it for a Ethereum was a way to commit to that idea that immutability is valuable. And the developers that kept developing a Ethereum Classic they are showing their willingness to lose the good, they could have solid at the beginning and but no they decided to stay to stay there and defend that idea.

And finally a different study case we have Bitcoin versus Bitcoin Cash. This was it started with contentious discussion about block size as to how many transactions can go into every block then. It got tangled with sacred discussions, and it blew up eventually with people saying: “No no, we are being more truthful to the original idea of Satoshi Nakamoto, and that's why we're going to make these changes in the protocol, and we're going to develop it this way”. But if we look at how it got resolved in the end, we see that people also made very strong propagandistic campaigns, if you go to bitcoin.com you will see that it's it tries to portray Bitcoin Cash as an equivalent to Bitcoin Core or perhaps as an improvement to Bitcoin. It's not clear. So if someone is not familiar with the Bitcoin ecosystem they will go to bitcoin.com, sounds legitimate enough, and they will say: “See, that Bitcoin Cash seems to be better”, and they will not be sure which one to go for. So this is what I mean that when forks get resolved there might be because of technological reasons or all the way to propagandistic reasons: it's about the story that they tell, it's about the reputation that the maintainer of the project rallies among the community.

So I think I only have five minutes, so I'm going to give some time for questions. So thank you very much for your attention. If you have questions there is a microphone here. I don't know if… Thank you!

I don't know any questions, any feedback, things that I missed, important things that I missed or something that you disagree with and you want to fight with me here on stage? Some punches? No? Thank you very much

_Diego:_ Let's give another hand, thank you so much, Ome. Ok, so we do have another talk coming up straight away, that we're gonna get ready for. But we also have a workshop that is going to be taking Polis… You are needed elsewhere, I will talk with you in just a second…
