# m52go

_**Critical Decentralisation Cluster 36c3 - P2P Trading in Cryptoanarchy**_

[youtu.be/ly8Fk9SvQ8g](https://youtu.be/ly8Fk9SvQ8g)

_**Abstract**_

How can we trade directly with another party on the internet, without involving a trusted third party or legal system? Is there a way to trust the other party to be honest? Bisq recently implemented a dispute resolution system that keeps control of escrowed funds between the 2 traders only (2-of-2 multisig, instead of 2-of-3 multisig with trusted arbitrator). See how it combines game-theoretic, financial, and cryptographic tools to accomplish sovereign (and anonymous) peer-to-peer trading.

_**Transcription**_

_Diego:_ Come up here real quick Steve, well while we're waiting for to get the last bit of this up here, I see that you have a name m52go. Can you give us… how did this name have… I like to talk to nerds about how they got their nerd names. So how did you get this name?

_Steve:_ Oh it's not nerdy at all actually. It's from before I was a nerd, I was a really big car fan, a big fan of cars and so, it's named after a car yeah.

_Diego:_ Ok. Well you know it's slightly disappointing story but at least it's not nerdy. Well its car nerdy, but it's not nerd nerdy. So we are ready to begin. You can go ahead and grab that clicker and do clicker things with it, and take this mic and do microphone things with it. So I'm gonna pass this off to Steve, let's give him a great big hand. It's kind of a mediocre hand. Let's give him a great big hand. There we go, let's get some cheers.

_Steve:_ Thanks Diego. Hi, everyone. My name is Steve. I contribute to the Bisq Network. Bisq is a decentralized Bitcoin exchange network. So unlike other so-called decentralized exchanges, you may have heard of Bisq — it's software that you run on your own machine, that when you run it you become a part of the Bisq peer-to-peer network, and that's where all trading activity takes place. So there is no website that facilitates this activity, everything happens over the software. The contributor network is decentralized, so there is no company, everybody who contributes has their own roles to propel the network forward. And Bisq’s dispute resolution mechanism is also as of about two months ago now also decentralized, which is what I'd like to talk about today.

So just for some background I'm gonna start off by talking about dispute resolution on other types of peer-to-peer exchanges. So we'll start off by just briefly going through peer-to-peer trading without an exchange. Just you know informally when if I was to meet up with one of you and just exchange Bitcoin informally. Well what we could do in that case of a dispute there. And then we'll talk about the decentralized exchange model of the dispute resolution, and how that's typically handled. And then well I think the meat of the talk will be on how Bisq, what I like to think of as an exchange network, how Bisq handles it. And how that works.

So for no exchange, if you were to meet up with somebody in a park or online, or Telegram or whatever it is however people transact with Bitcoin informally, other cryptocurrencies informally. You're typically on your own, you're engaging with the other person and good-faith hoping that they'll do the trade in good faith. And if any issues come up that they'll resolve the problem as best they can. If that doesn't work then you could in theory engage the court system. Press a case, get a lawyer, go to court. Now obviously this is mostly too expensive, too impractical and probably ultimately too unpredictable to really to work in practice. But I just wanted to note that it's there as an option. The court systems in general have a lot of issues, but they have worked quite well over the years to bring about stability and law in you know bringing about a relatively orderly society.

With the decentralized exchange model, some names you've probably heard of, the LocalBitcoins, what else, HodlHodl, tend to employ, actually Bisq until recently tend to employ a 2-of-3 multisignature escrow setup, whereby deposit funds are sent to a two-of-three multisig escrow, so the keys belong to both the peers and a third party. Usually the exchange so the exchange will have some kind of an arbitrator or dispute handling agent who will have that third key, in case there is an issue they'll evaluate the situation and sign the funds over as they deem appropriate. That decision is authoritative, so if you have any issues with the way the decision was made or the way the funds were allocated, you're pretty much out on your own. And another downside of this setup is the uncertain legal standing with a third key. The exchange operator takes the risk of being in the position of having an influence over the allocation of funds, which we're not really sure at this point where that stands from a legal or regulatory standpoint. But it is something that's noteworthy that I think might become a problem in the future.

Which brings us to Bisq and the new way of dispute resolution that it's recently implemented. The 2-of-3 multisig escrow becomes a 2-of-2 escrow where the keys belong only to the traders, the peers who were involved in the trade. And dispute resolution then becomes handled by trader chat, and then two methods of escalation which I'll talk more about in a second. But I want to note these percentages. So I'll be spending probably most of the time on mediation and refund agents, but I want to note before we even start that once the bugs are ironed out and this system works well, chat and mediation should account for the vast majority 99% of dispute resolution. The last means of obtaining a refund agent should be rare exceedingly rare no more than 1% or you know one case a month there's something really really rare.

Well let's start up start out with the first step trader chat. So this is not really a dispute resolution mechanism it's really about I mean it is but it's just chat. If you have an issue with your trader with your peer open up a chat and have a chat. We've had this now for a couple of months I think, the first three years that Bisq was an operation there was no chat, and so small issues, honest problems, just things that could be easily resolved by just talking to the other person are now easily resolvable by chat. This is end-to-end encrypted highly private, highly secure. You're not leaking any metadata or anything by using it. And so that's pretty much what that is.

The next means or medium of the speed resolution, in case chat doesn't work, in case you're not able to get along with the other person, in case the person is unresponsive, click this button, get support and you can engage a mediator. Now a mediator in this case is a person who knows the rules of trading on Bisq very well. So they'll look at your situation, and they'll make a suggestion. And they'll suggest: ok, one peer should receive this much, the other peer should receive this much. Because they don't have a key in the multisig the suggestion does not have any power on its own, but by clicking on the accept button each peer is signing the payout transaction as suggested, and if both peers accept and sign that suggestion, payout is made, and the dispute is solved. As I mentioned before this should cover, once the system is smoothed out, it should cover the vast majority of all cases. And that several or three years now that we've that the Bisq Network has been in operation, I don't recall too many cases of there being disagreement over the amount of a payout. It's mostly like: Oh, I was deemed guilty when I was supposed to be innocent, kind of thing payout amounts are not usually too big of a point of contention. So this should work most of the time.

Yeah and I just want to note here that the whole point of these first two steps, chat and mediation, is to encourage traders to resolve this dispute on their own. As mentioned they're the only people who have any kind of control over the funds in that multisig, so the quickest and most efficient way of resolving disputes is to do as much as possible to help them help themselves.

The third and final and hopefully rare way of resolving disputes on Bisq with the new dispute resolution mechanism is to engage a refund agent and the Bisq DAO. Now before I go any further I want to just make a quick note on the DAO. This is not the DAO that you're probably thinking of if you haven't heard about the Bisq DAO before. I'm having a full talk on what the Bisq DAO actually is, how it works tomorrow evening as a part of the about:freedom assembly. So you're more than welcome to attend that to see exactly how that works. In this case, for this talk all you have to know is that the Bisq DAO is a consensus driven tool to govern the financial state of the Bisq Network. What that means in practice is that the Bisq DAO is basically an economic system for the Bisq Network itself. So when you do work for Bisq, you earn some of Bisq’s colored Bitcoin called bsq, you earn some of that, and when you trade on Bisq you can, if you want, use bsq to spend, to pay trading fees. So there's a an internal economy of bsq creation for people who deserve it through work on the Bisq Network, and for people who use it to consume the service of the Bisq Network itself.

This is important because the refund agent is gonna look at the dispute case and front the Bitcoin for the person that he thinks deserves it. So obviously he doesn't have any kind of control over the funds in the multisig, so he's going to go around that, and he's gonna look at the case, reevaluate the case again and he front the Bitcoin to the person that he thinks deserves it and then make a reimbursement request to the DAO for the Bitcoin that he paid to the trader. Now this might be a little… right… so front the Bitcoin request reimbursement from the DAO. Now the only reason that this guy would front the Bitcoin is if he's confident he's going to be paid back which brings me back to what I was just saying about the DAO and how it works through consensus. The refund agent is only going to front Bitcoin if the case is if it's clear that the person that he paid the Bitcoin deserves the Bitcoin, because when he requests for compensation from the DAO he's gonna have to say: I paid Bitcoin to this user for this reason, this was the case, these were their circumstances. And the voters in that cycle of the Bisq DAO are gonna look at that request, evaluate it manually, there's nothing automated about the DAO although it's decentralized autonomous organization — all actions on the DAO are human actions — people voting in the DAO we're gonna look at this reimbursement request and evaluate whether or not it was a worthy use of DAO funds.

And this is cut off, but this is an overview of the full process… so, that's what I wanted to mention back here. So until now the process has been for the user, although I know this is a lot of words and may be a convoluted process, for the user it's relatively simple and straightforward, chat is just a simple chat interface, mediation — click a button to engage it and then accept or reject another button, and if that doesn't work click another button to engage a refund agent and receive Bitcoin. It's basically just pressing buttons and receiving Bitcoin. But in reality, behind the scenes things are a bit more complicated, I'm not going to go through all of this, we've actually gone through everything on this side in the colored boxes, we already talked about. But the key to this process that I haven't mentioned yet is here at the top, which is cut off, but basically this the process starts up at the top, this the top two boxes are the beginning of the trade. So the left box is send funds the 2-of-2 multisig which we've already mentioned, the right box is sign, a delayed payout transaction that sends the funds in the 2-of-2 multisig essentially to the DAO, ok. So what's happening is that at the beginning of the trade we're making the assumption that within a reasonable amount of time the traders will come to an agreeable solution. So in the case of if you're trading Monero that's 10 days, if you're trading fiat that's 20 days, because fiat rates tend to take a little bit longer. But after that time has gone by, this payout transaction becomes publishable. If that transaction is published, the funds in that multisig address are sent to the Bisq DAO which is where the refund agent will request reimbursement. So basically the funds are being sent to the DAO in a sense increase the balance of funds in the DAO so that it can pay back the funds through the refund agent later. There's a little bit more to the process you can't send plane BTC to the DAO, you have to first convert it to bsq which is the purpose of the donation address, and yeah the arbitrator is gonna receive bsq from the DAO, because the DAO can only handle bsq, and then he's gonna get the bsq back, sell it for BTC to replace the BTC that he paid to the aggrieved trader.

But that's pretty much how it works, it's decentralized the trust, I think that the trust component is necessary if you're gonna have two traders exchange, two strangers do an exchange, you're gonna have to trust somebody to resolve a dispute when it comes up. The difference is that in this case you're not trusting one party to, both make a good decision and allocate the funds properly, that responsibility has been spread out over a couple of different people, and you're pushing basically you're pushing the peers to resolve the dispute on their own, if they can't do that, then you're engaging the refund agent who works through the DAO, but of course the complexity of all that has been abstracted, so that typical users don't have to worry about it. So that's all I have. Anybody questions?
