# Alexis

_**Critical Decentralisation Cluster 36c3 - Digital Integrity of the Human Person**_

[youtu.be/XvlcikD1Ows](https://youtu.be/XvlcikD1Ows)

_**Abstract**_

Every human evolves today in multi-dimensional physical and digital environment. If each individual is to keep its individuality and autonomy in its daily choices, it must be protected and given effective tools to defend its own autonomy. Recognizing that human life has been digitally extended must question ourselves on what makes us human today. Should personal data be considered as component of the person, rather than objects that can be owned by whoever collects that data? Should our digital integrity be protected? If each human person already has a right to physical and mental integrity (Swiss Constitution article 10 al.2), shouldn't it have a right to digital integrity? This talk will introduce this new legal concept, its possible implications for data protection and how this concept could be introduced in the current legal framework.

_**Transcription**_

_Diego:_ Coming up, guys, we've got Alexis here who is loosely he put a very big emphasis loosely associated with the Swiss Cryptoeconomics. And he's gonna be talking with us about the digital integrity of the human person. And I don't know about you, but I see a lot of human persons here, so I think this talk would be applicable to all of you. So why don't you let us know all about this. Give a hand.

_Alexis:_ Thank you. I'm not loosely associated to the Swiss Cryptoeconomics table, I'm completely associated with them. So digital integrity of the human person this is a project I've been working on for now a few years. And it's been moving on in Switzerland, and so it's a very new legal concept we might say it's a legal hacking, if you want, approach to have. But basically just to keep you up to date on how it's progressing and if you don't know, to give you a small insight of what kind of digital rights it is, the digital integrity of the human person is something which will naturally come, I think, and that's why it's being start to be accepted in very specific communities. But I'll come over there.

So yeah where does it come from. It just comes from this very strong opposition right now between people who think that what is happening online, what is in the digital space is part of the real life. So this is a famous quote from Peter Sunde where he thinks so if you don't talk about IRL because our IRL in real life doesn't mean anything, for him Internet is also the real life, ok. And on the other side you have this industry and a lot of people even from the traditional politics, traditional people they think data is the new oil. And you have a lot of Minister of Economy or whatever which try to push this industry of data to become a modern nation and they, their principle is that data is oil, which for me always felt wrong. So data is not the oil, and I had to, we had to find some way to counter this.

So the concept is very simple is that if you look in your physic, in your digital rights and your fundamental digital rights in many constitutions, you have a right to your physical and mental integrity. And this is just basically the state says: you're protected as a person. And we need to extend this to the digital self to the digital realm. So basically we just add one word, we say: that the person is not just a body and a mind, but it's also actually, also its digital self. It's very, very, very simple, but it has some very profound impact, because if you look at why physical and mental, why your body and your mental states are protected in the Constitution is in order for you to keep your autonomy as a human person to be able to act autonomously. If you are always tortured physically or mentally then you are not free anymore, ok. So here it's a bit the same idea is to say: ok if we want to be free people in the digital space also, then we need our full autonomy and we need to have our digital integrity protected or at least guaranteed to be protected by the state authorities the same way. So it's just applying the same mechanism to that was already existing, is already existing for your physical and mental state, to apply this to the digital part of you. So that will also mean something which I was a feeling, which I thought would not, was not good, and it was kind of hard to explain sometimes why it was not feeling good that harvesting data itself by nature is something that is harming the digital integrity of the person. And then if you want to be able to harm the integrity of a person, you needed his consent. It's the same way for your physical integrity — you allow people to harm you if you give consent. You go to the hairdresser, it's actually they're cutting part of your body, but you still give consent you know in this thing. So and in some times of course you don't need your consent, because if you are in an accident and the doctor needs to cut off your leg, because he thinks he needs to cut off your leg, he will do so, he doesn't need your authorization. So there's the level of autonomy and consent that you accept for harming your own integrity, but basically we just applied the same concept.

So there are a few major consequences of this in our legal system is that basically it would appear in the right to life. In many Constitution you have the right to live and the first thing is like you cannot be killed, and you have a right to be protected on your physical and mental integrity. We would add it there, we will extend then the legal notion of what life is would include also the digital part. So one of the consequences also is that in the legal perspective it would put data in a different category today, data is undefined, and a lot of people use personal data, use this a lot of people, use this gap to take kind of ownership you know. So this is why in the whole industry, the digital industry the fact of getting data is something which is normal you can be owner, you can resell, there is nothing that is forbidding you to do this, because people don't consider this as an object. So if we start thinking that if you have a life, digital life also your extended to the digital self and you have an integrity, digital integrity then, what is building this digital self of you is not an object, cannot be sold like, you cannot sell a part of your body, you're not allowed to do so. So we would apply the same consequences. So this actually has already been said by the a group of authorities of data protection, they made a political declaration in two years, in 2018, where they were saying that personal data are not objects, they are actually part of the human person. And it also brings to another element is that it's very hard for someone to understand where all the data that is making itself, himself, is people don't have a good understanding, and it's very hard to know exactly where is all my data and where all things can influence me. So when I say that no law should assume this is today we have built a lot of legal system and even GDPR which is the most pushy law in terms of data protection, start from the point where it assumes that you know where your data is, you have to know where your data is so you can defend it. But in reality is the false assumptions and many laws use this. That's why you had a sham with faith with Facebook when he had to go and get his data, it took him two years with a big procedure he had to go, and fight against Facebook. And this is not something achievable by anyone, so we have to assume not that you know where your data is, but that you don't know where your data is, and all the laws have to be built like this. So the fact that we create this digital integrity, even if you don't know where the data is, if even the data is not in your reach, you're still protected, and you still have rights based on that data.

So for example what that concept would bring to GDPR, it's not a compatible, it's at a higher level. So you have fundamental right and GDPR is as an implementation is a very technical and legal implementation, and it would not be incompatible, you would have to do some adaptation. But what I was looking for is one very important article, the Article 2 of GDPR, if you read it, these are the exclusions why GDPR does not apply, and one of them is everything which is related to security and to terrorism, and to financing of terrorism. And when you see, so this is the state using your data to try to fight terrorism. And I call it the security blackhole — whenever you talk about security the data is not important anymore, there's no more rights over there. But this is not true in the physical world, in the physical realm, even if they're fighting terrorism you each have your rights and you cannot be jailed without process. And there's a whole rule — they cannot beat you in the street in Europe right now just because they might think you're a terrorist. That's not how it does not have work so. But in the digital space yes. So basically if we force the state and in the fundamental rights that all the Constitution to respect your digital integrity, that means there would be no more, it should be an one of the consequences, that the security blackhole should disappear, in the police forces when they are fighting for a crime, they have to respect the digital integrity of all the people which are around.

So we talked about Constitution and law, and this is the decentralized Critical Decentralization Cluster. Normally a lot of people are of us, we try to go above the law, we try to like be a good anarchist, and try to assume well, to try to build the new rules of tomorrow and not to stick on the old ones. But here I do assume I'll make an assertion that we keep the state at its current form, and we keep the laws and Constitution, and I think in reality it will evolve, but we will still need some human laws and this principle will help to may be transition to something else. But it's basically using the existing legal framework and adapting it to be good for the digital humans and human society. So it still will help to impose to the state to interact in a good way with this digital, with is its citizen, not imposing mass surveillance as a default, ok. Also the other way around is the state needs to be in a position where it can provide the right tools you know. For example most of us here we do think that a peer-to-peer network is something which is can be used for good and can be used for, it's a good place where we can be transparent anonymous as we want, and it's a good place where we can interact between each other, respectfully to each other. We don't need to our harvest millions of personal data to have a good relationship, for example to pay something we can do this without giving metadata, and this is good. And the state should be actually promoting its own interaction with the citizen in this way. A government accepting a payment in crypto or providing or not providing but allowing its citizens to use self-serving digital identities, and to develop tools that they communicate in places, where they can respect the privacy, and that the government doesn't ask you for zillions of information which is not needed for what they need to do to you.

So when we talk about implementing this basically there are few places which are already now identified to implement this concept. The 2 main document which people would know, I mean that I'm interested in right now, is the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, Article 3 al. 1, and the Swiss Constitution, Article 10, where it's just, it's an article which has right to life, and the second part is says every person has the right to personal liberty, in particular to physical and mental integrity. So the idea is very simple is that we just add the word ‘digital’ to extend the personal to the digital realm.

So the work has gone very fast these last years, and we have the chance in Switzerland to have a federal system where every canton, every substate has its own constitution. So now there's a work of one canton, which is the Valais canton, that are renewing their whole Constitution. And so we have the chance that to work with the Commission of Fundamental Rights, so the people who are meant to rewrite just that part. And they the kid the Commission accepted the proposal. So they will not add the word next to the two first ones, they will make a second phrase, which will be simple, where ‘every person has right to digital integrity’. And this will be presented to the to the whole Constitution assembly that will during this year and maybe we'll have the first real implementation in the local Constitution of this principle.

So I'm just going to, so we, it's getting some attention especially from the Data Protection Agency, so we were, I was in Dakar in front of the whole group of the French speaking Data Protection Agency to present this. And we were already invited by the Swiss Data Protection Office to present this in the Swiss day on Data Protection.

The next event are pretty interesting because we have one event in Neuchâtel in Switzerland, where inside the law university they're making a half-day colloquium on the topic, and they inviting teacher from different branches — so international private right, a constitutional law, this privacy law and so on. And each of them is going to kind of assess this new right in their own domain and see how what it opens for research possibilities. There is a large lobby group in Switzerland called the Digital Gesellschaft, and I will be presenting this in the winter congress for those of you who will be there. It will be roughly the same presentation as here. And then in term of future work, how its proceeding, basically we're writing up assay about the topic to go more deep in the subject. Hopefully with the University of Neuchâtel and other there will be some legal research starting. And what is really interesting is Switzerland is that we have a real action, mode of action, so we're going through different canton and maybe at the federal level, depending on if we raise enough money, but basically we can ask, we can prepare initiative and try to propose this to the people to actually add in their constitution. And we'll see, so we have the example of Valais which is through redoing the Constitution, but you can also push more, and hopefully in some canton next year we'll have this kind of initiative.

And then we try to do websites, for now is mostly in French, but basically this is where we have all the resources that we try to collect on the topic. Ok. Thank you very much. Questions? If someone has questions, of course.

_Audience:_ I will stand up. What would be an example of something that would break your personal digital integrity?

_Alexis:_ So the best example of course is Cambridge Analytica. Cambridge Amalytica, have you seen? Yeah, ok. So basically here we're using data, you have no conscious they're modifying your bubble, and at the end you're actually vote in a way, you act in a way that you might have not decided yourself, ok. This is a bit of a kind of extreme, where you're pushed into doing something. But what I came also is that just the fact of hosting the data and keeping it without you even knowing this, this is basically already harming itself. To conceive a harm on your physical body is very easy ok, you have this physical body and we're going to harm it. On the mental state is already a bit more complex you know. For example I cannot brainwash you, that would not be good, but I can sell you ads on TV all the time that's okay you know. I still try to influence your mental state. And in your digital identity, integrity, sorry, the amount of data that people can collect with you, and the precision of your mentos, your yourself, the knowledge of yourself that can be gained is so big, that it's bigger than yourself you know, and it can be reused against you. So that's the main case that we're looking for, of course, is that based on your profiling. We know things that even you don't know, and by presenting them to you back we can influence that we can fills you in a way that you have no clue basically. That's the main case yes.

_Audience:_ Hello. I have a question about terms. What do you think about the term of the informational itself, what is it called, self-determination, which has been used in Germany before. I think like digital for example we may face a future, where digital there's no more than thing, it may be something else except zeros and ones. So perhaps on the long run the informational self-determination might be the better term?

_Alexis:_ Ok. So first I'm going to give you another example, because the two first word or physical and mental, and actually you have a lot of, if you go in details you have a lot of differences people that were not happy in Germany, some in Germany maybe, but sometimes it's they use ‘geist’ so spirit, fit in French they say …, there are some differences. So it doesn't matter about the word, it's what it, it's a more general concept. So what did, what is important is it's understandable by people. And so in French we had this also debate between ‘numeric’ and ‘digitale’ because now ‘digitale’ is becoming a word which is used for ‘numeric’, and a lot of people use ‘digitale’ as digital. And we still, we say: no ‘numeric’ is the, if you talk to people this is the most understandable. And there is also the option about ‘informational’. But if you go into street and you say, if you look at what people say, they say: I have a digital life, I have a digital self. These are concept where if you go to see your grandparents there will be: Ok, I am the, I already heard that. It's simple. If you go: Yeah I have an informational self, that's more complicated, they don't realize what it is. That's my feeling. So it's more about what people in general would understand.

_Audience:_ Hi. Thank you very much for your talk. And my question would be: do you mean, do you hear me? So there would be people who would argue with the right to informational self-determination, but there's also the concept of data ownership. And I think in Switzerland for example they're like people in law, science is writing lots about the data ownership. And so what I think it's a very dangerous concept, but it's also, it could be…

_Alexis:_ Which one?

_Audience:_ The data ownership concept. And so have you been talking with people who would argue against your concept, with the data ownership, and what do you think about it?

_Alexis:_ So indeed data ownership is… actually there is two kind of people who promote data ownership. There is, people say there's data as an object, it can be sold, and there is an ownership, and let's make a business out of it okay. That's the first version of it. And the second version of it is people say: oh I have to find a way to reclaim my data. So I will claim ownership on this data, and I'll try to like rebuy it. Ok. So they try to do a good way, the objective is the same is how do we get back control of our, how do we control our digital life and we protect ourselves. Now but if you accept that it's an object, that is still ownership, ownership can be transferred legally you know. When you are in a fundamental right, a fundamental right cannot be transferred. It's even your body — you cannot sell your body in French there's a legal term which is called … that means you cannot even make your body part of a contract, that would be against your physical integrity actually, your physical integrity. So to be able to apply them, if we accept even in a purpose of protecting ourselves that we have data ownership and we rebuy this data, it doesn't protect us in the long term, because we can always sell it back. And we will sell it back because the service that we get are so good with it, so easy, because it's complicated to be self-determined in the digital space, that we will sell it back easily. So and this should not happen. So removing it from ownership and it's something you cannot sell it's part of yourself, it's a but it's a part of your body, and what constitutes your personhood. So yeah I did speak to some of those and it's quite conflict.

_Audience:_ So your argumentation or whether human, the human rights in the European Charter, so your argument there. So but do we need it in the first step, because I think, but this argumentation you can already do it, because if you sell data you can harm me in mental and physical, so you can argue that whether standing rights now, and may make it sense to do it in a second step. So first step okay doing the long way through the law, through their courts, and say: okay we trying to do that now, because it's already there.

_Alexis:_ So this is how a right appears. A right appears when people think they have this right. And actually it takes time to appear, and you don't have to wait until it's in written in the Constitution to make it exist ok. So to make it exist you have to take talk about your digital life and your digital self to others, and that you don't want to be harmed in your digital life, you want to be able to protect yourself. And by doing this you're already pushing this principle ok. But then it's also, but at the end we still need to at one point write it down, this is my feeling. And this will come with stages you know. For example you can let's say now you're in a judicial process about mismanaging of your data. Then if you really think about this principle you can meet he asked the judge about my digital integrity, even though there is no law or no Constitution, he should answer the question or he today I'm sure he will answer the question. So I'm also looking for some cases in Switzerland, legal cases where we can push this argument just saying, asking the question: is it the fact that this company is harvesting data on these people, is this threat to the digital integrity of those people? You just ask the question and the judge has to say: well maybe it does. Maybe you will say digital integrity does not exist. Ok, we'll ask next the next one yeah.

_Audience:_ So thanks for all the support for the NIM project and more in the future. But on to this question which is I think related, so I think like in Switzerland, like NIM is based on Switzerland, we've had a very good experience with the local government, but that's not the case for many countries, many countries have very corrupt governments, very adversarial governments. What should people in those countries do, and I guess that they're doing some form of technology, can you, is there any connection between kind of cryptographic integrity and there's kind of more metaphysical notion of digital integrity that you have?

_Alexis:_ Ok. Just for food, this charger he says thank you for the support because we're, I'm helping Harry in this project. So yeah, so it is not first thing yeah, it's we're not talking about cryptography integrity, we're not talking about talking about integrity in the sense you're doing a hash function of the human body. That doesn't, it's not like this integrity of the human body is just is of the view of yourself, it's just a concept allows that forbid someone else to come and interfere with you. But we don't define how. This is society will define how we interfere in the future. So Switzerland's we can move these projects ahead, and we could talk about it and it's good. And basically it's also an argument we can start making, and people are careful. Other countries not the case. So another country is actually we have to do what history already did, because people already fought for their physical integrity, and they fought for their mental integrity. This is a concept that started in the 18th century you know with the Lumier, and this is where it started. So basically we need to do the same thing, we need to do what we're doing here: self defense using the tools, building the right tools and pushing and building those peer-to-peer networks and mastering cryptography, and now building economy, and this is why also which is great with crypto, and the new consensus model and the incentive models that we have right now, token economics all the thing which is crazy, because now we start to have an economical power also in this using this these tool that we present, all this world of a free digital selves that can build a society. So yeah, if you cannot push legally the thing then you just continue exactly what we're doing.

_Diego:_ Thank you so much Alexis. I would say that he would be available offstage to answer any other questions, but he has informed me that he does not like to consult with the masses and plebs, and so that's not gonna. I'm just kidding he's gonna be available off stage to answer any discussions that you guys have.
