# Sergey Simanovsky

_**Critical Decentralisation Cluster 36c3 - cyber~Congress (Sergey Simanovsky)**_

[youtu.be/GjeNkO3Nilc](https://youtu.be/GjeNkO3Nilc)

_**Abstract**_

Our mission is to fuckGoogle and other megacorps. We are geeks that build open-source things. Code first. Everything else later.

_**Transcription**_

_Diego:_ And I think we're pretty much all set up and ready to go. So I'm gonna break protocol here, which I try to do at least once a day to stick it to the man, and yet let's early, start off a couple of minutes early. Just so you can have that extra couple of minutes for questions or you know maybe you just talk really-really slow, we'll have to find out how good of a presenter he is. So this is Sergey, he's gonna be talking with us about digital slavery and digital freedom. Let's go and give him great big hand.

_Sergey:_ Right, thank you. And let me… just wait… yeah, so I'm gonna talk about as Diego said about digital slavery and freedom in terms of Web 2.0 and Web 3.0, and I think the topic is a little bit of a salt, but I think a lot of people underestimate what it actually means to people, and how it actually works, and what can be done about it. And at the end I'm gonna mention what we do at cyber⁓Congress and how we try to solve those problems.

So everybody calls it Web 3.0, we call it The Great Web. Why? Because we think the name is cooler than Web 3.0, The Great Web sounds much better. And there's a lot of descriptions on the internet about Web 3.0, and my personal description well it's right there, but the idea is that it's a direct in communication between different parties where there are nodes, robots or humans, doesn't matter really, without any black box intermediaries, their coordination, their cooperation between one each other and the motivation between the users to do so. So obviously we're talking about some digital tokens or a crypto or whatever right, it can be an FT tokens, they can be not an FT tokens, it doesn't really matter as long as that communication is motivated, which basically also introduces Sybil resistance as well, so we can fight spam if we don't have the Sybil resistance as well. So that's really important, that's how I see Web 3.0.

So this is like the progress of semantics, and the picture is a bit… well it's my bad, it's not very good quality, but basically it's talking about the PC era, the Usernet era, and going up to Web 1.0, Web 2.0, Web 3.0 and it has right up the Web 4.0. And to me that's actually pretty scary concept, because if the way the web continues to evolve actually gets to Web 4.0, it might look like an automatic gearbox. What I mean by an automatic gearbox is where everything is already decided for you, and humans don't really have a decision, what they do, how they do it, or you know well don't have any say in what to do. So our mission, and I'm gonna talk about ourselves, I mean every human kind on earth, every species on earth, that can think for themselves, I think their mission is to understand that in order for us not to get to the Web 4.0 that the corporation sees, we need to do something about the current web and the development of Web 3.0.

Well, some numbers. 23 percent of the internet is free, and that's not a great number, that means that's you know 77 percent, if my math is correct, is not free. And that's from Freedom House. 47 percent of our population have some social media blocked, that's not okay, that's more than half. 42 percent of world population have the internet cuts due to political reasons. So that's from Internet Trends. Countries like Kazakhstan, USA, Russia, China, New Zealand, Australia, UK introduced restriction laws, and that's not normal guys. The previous speaker mentioned digital awareness and digital self rights actually. I think it's all been already done — there is cryptography, public key and a private key, and that kind of solves the whole question, which is basically a fingerprint, you have your digital print, which is basically the representation of your soul. And for the past twenty years all of us have been going on internet and living some kind of print. And well it's not okay to introduce restrictions from the government's in order to restrict those things.

This is just another picture of who owns, well it should be the internet but in my opinion who owns you, because each single person uses the internet, and well there are very few beneficiaries to the Internet unfortunately, and this is just like a picture of how they look, and you can see that all those companies, they basically own each other. And you know that that's not normal.

Why is it like that? Well it's quite simple — there was three protocols that really helped the Internet to evolve, but they kind of fucked up the Internet as well, so which is DNS, HTTP and URL. I call them ‘Dante's worst nightmare’, so if you have a read the book, then you realize what I'm talking about. The problem is centralized top level domains, no interest of solving securities that the beneficiaries own the Internet's right now, we're still in the uncontrolled data loss, and so on and so forth. So you know I'm not gonna talk about pockets routing, because I think all of you know how it works, but if you do know how location-based addressing works, it's not normal, it's just fucked up.

So this is what Google collects about you right. And this is not all, so this is just some things, I'm not gonna go over them obviously. And so if you have like a phone in your pocket right, now even if you have Google Sync switched on… off sorry, it's still collecting some of this information. And the previous speaker mentioned Cambridge Analytica — it’s my favorite case, and those guys, heads at the top level on average they had 5000 touch points on every US citizen, but at the top they had 70 000 touch points on certain citizens. I mean does anybody here know like 1000 things about themselves. I mean, I personally really don't. So when somebody tells me they know 70 000 things about me in order for me to make a decision based on semantics which is political or social, that's not ok.

Well, The Great Web, back to the good stuff, those are some of the virtues that I think, that I personally believe that the few the Web 3.0 should have, which is offline browsing, local dedication, and if you all know 80 percent of data is pretty much the same, so it's really easy to cache it locally, a local service reputation and efficiency, CRs, IPFS, because I think, I profess is really important protocol, cyber registers is what I mean by that is that people should have the ability to prove something that they do without actually revealing their own identity, miners are service providers — the miners of the future are service providers of the future, well I used the word ‘miner’ in broader terms right, it doesn't have to be a miner who actually mined something, it could be proof of stake, proof of work, prove of authority, whatever the consensus is, I call it a ‘miner’, there should be some kind of a ranking mechanism and indexation mechanism, because without that that's not gonna really move any forward, it should be decentralized, and this should be a consensus mechanism or some kind of a consensus mechanism and all that picture in order for people to agree on what they agree on otherwise it's not gonna work.

So what do we do about it. And well I couldn't not mention ourselves you know, I love myself. So yeah basically we making, we did it's already, it's already working, the project has been live for three years, it's on GitHub, everything that we do is open source, and basically it's a search protocol. And what we do, we use IPFS and tender means. We let the user create what we call a cyberlink which is not a hyperlink, it's a completely different thing, but basically user connects with the help of semantics to different IPFS hashes, he then puts them on a knowledge, they are then computed on a knowledge graph, that information is dynamically ranked. This is the rank mechanism, but you know it's a bit complicated. But anyways the protocol is community governed, so in theory that's well, we hope, because the ranking mechanism is always kind of a red herring, we hope that the governance can through testing change this as the protocol progresses, and then it's all computed on via GPUs owned by validators on a knowledge graph, and that knowledge is obtained. It sounds like this is kind of like, well not really fantastic, and at first it's not, but while we're doing it we realized that with the help of changing the semantical field users can have a lot of things that are introduced to them, which weren't available before, started with autonomous robots, going on to personal data bases, for example somebody who's been, I don't know, let's say you've been trading on chain and you know making transactions, you've been reading white papers, you've been reading some information books about trading, and you've been linking all the steps, you've been committing to the knowledge graph all this time for three years. And then what you can do, because that information is stored locally in your own browser, it's not actually a browser but we call it a browser, because there's no other word for it right now, you could you go to that browser and you ask it a question: “Well what have I been doing wrong?” And that browser will actually give you an answer, it will tell you, yeah, well: “I've been watching what you've been linking, I've been watching your personal knowledge graph”. So basically you have the ability to talk to God, and God being yourself obviously and not somebody else. So this is just like some simple things. It can introduce things like unified semantics, it can let developers actually take matter in their own hands and let developers decide how their apps or whatever they do is indexed, because right now if I'm a developer and I did an app, I don't have the power to say to Google how to index it right, Google decides to do it not me. And that's not ok once again. So once again all of this is basically to be honest with you we actually to Google's original PageRank, as the foundation we introduced Sybil resistance, we introduced bandwidth, some dynamics, and it works. I mean basically Google can do it as well, but I hope that maybe they will one day. This is… all right you can't see that and I didn't think you will be able to see that, so we're not gonna go there. But that's those are the different things between how we function and how Google functions. All of this is available on GitHub right here, and that's pretty much it. I'm gonna keep it short, so thank you. If you have any questions I'll be happy to answer them. Thank you.

Yeah sorry Diego I kind of made it short, and I didn't even read it within 10 minutes, because of your hands. That guy there.

_Audience:_ Yeah, thank you. I think that we have talked to you yesterday. Also I think this is, I think it's one of the most like valuable like talk that I hear got exposed to these ideas that you're working on. And I'm just thinking like how the future like you know this knowledge graph, how do you like protect it in the future like you know, maybe been stolen like you know information about you, how will it work.

_Sergey:_ It's a very good question. I've actually been asked a lot about abusing, and when we were launching a few days ago with our last test night, we did it live and we had a few, about three or four people asked pretty much the same question. They say: “Well, how will I be safe from abused?” Well there is two answers. For one this is a distributed thing, it's a decentralized thing, so the more people do that, the more it is protected. The second answer is all the information that you do right is actually stored locally. Well we are quite, we are considerable privacy right now, the knowledge graph is not private, and actually well we do, we have ideas how to do it, but we're not certain 100% how to achieve it now, because otherwise we're not gonna make it scalable. And well on the other hand right now that information is only hashes of the information, so nobody actually knows what it is, it's not something that, it's not like you say: “Well this is me and have a look at it, take it”. To go back to the abusement thing, the funny thing that we realized is that if people try to abuse that mechanism they don't abuse anyone but themselves. So it's fantastic, it's a very simple idea of changing the way we look at semantics can actually help us to change pretty much, the whole web. And yeah, so I'm not sure if I answered your question but, um yeah… sorry yeah… I'll try maybe later on like one to one yeah. Any more questions? Yeah go on. Yeah sure.

_Audience:_ My question is the role of proprietary software and DRM and user devices as a way of powering the oppression. Would you like to sort of comment on that?

_Sergey:_ Can you define what you mean by proprietary software?

_Audience:_ Anything where it's not open source and anything that doesn't meet the definition of the Free Software Foundation, and the intersection between the Free Software Foundation and the Open Source Consortium. So the software is proprietary —DRM, digital rights management, digital restrictions management, digital lock, copy protection.

_Sergey:_ It's a good question and I don't know if I have time to answer it. Ok, thanks, so sorry. I think I kind of moved beyond the line that says stand back. Broke the rules, sorry. Well everything that we use is open-source, everything that we use, including the original PageRank, it's open sourced. So there is nothing really that we want — there is no company behind us, we don't do jurisdictions, we don't believe in CAPTCHAs, we don't believe in KYCs, we don't believe in AMLs, we don't believe in laws, we don't believe that laws can help us to solve, whether it's Swiss laws whether it's the law from my mother's garden or whatever. I don't believe in it, I'm old enough, I'm 34, and old enough to have seen that laws don't function. And the only law that functions is a distributed consensus. And well once again if, I'm not saying that it's protected from somewhere, someone common in ten years time and saying that: “Wait, that asset, that the thing that you used here was proprietary, and now I will sue you”, well hopefully then in ten years time it will work a whole difference and completely differently. But I don't think anybody can be protected from that, I know that for example in Russia right now there is a big case with Nginx where the Rumbler decided 20 years, sorry 15 years after this was developed, they decided to sue the guy and say: “Well this is our software”, has been open source for 15 years, so well not really, it's not. So this is again the problem of the law, it's not the problem of the protocol, is the problem that the laws that try to restrict people and try to tell them what to think, how to think and that's exactly what we're trying to work against. So once again I'm not sure if I answered yeah. That's right yeah. Any more questions or do I have any more time, I'm not sure. No, ok, thank you. Thanks.

_Diego:_ All right, thank you very much Serge, thank you for…
