# polto

_**Critical Decentralisation Cluster 36c3 - KYC & Crypto-AML Tools (polto)**_

[https://youtu.be/z2yDk7yaTWM](https://youtu.be/z2yDk7yaTWM)

_**Abstract**_

What's wrong with the current Crypto-AML mainstream approach and why it's dangerous for our economies and our societies. What is really demanded by the law and how do we see cryptography can provide answers. Kickstarting the workshop on Crypto-AML tools.

_**Transcription**_

_Diego:_ Alright guys, we have our one slide slideshow man here. It's gonna be all him — no visuals, but you know what, with polto that's enough. That's enough for me. So he's gonna be talking with us about KYC/AML cryptocurrency stuff. For those of you who have been in the space for any significant portion of time, you've heard that comes up often. If you don't know what it is he'll probably tell you, he'll probably kind of go deep in depth. By the end of this you will be the most knowledgeable person on this subject for probably a 3000 mile radius. So I'm gonna hand this over to him, thanks polto, so let's give him a hand.

_polto:_ Thanks thank you. So yeah, quite boring topic probably, crypto anti money laundering, but it's really something that I'm observing since a long time, and it hurts me to see what's going on in this area. So I just finished a workshop on this topic. So the workshop is not really finished, its ongoing workshop during the entire CCC, so you can find me at the Swiss Cryptoeconomics assembly, there at the end. And if you come to me and say that you're interested that up in the topic, it's ongoing workshops so you're welcome to participate.

So the idea here is first what's wrong with this crypto AML. So for those who are not familiar, AML is anti money laundering, it's what financial intermediaries are legally obliged to check on you to understand that your transactions are legit and that you did not participate in to any money laundering or financement of terrorism. But at the same time the governments want this to be, how to say, to have a high enough barrier for money launderers to enter, but for normal people they should be able to transact easily without too much difficulties.

So why we should care about what's going on as a community. Because I think there is a lot of misinterpretation of the regulation, and the technology in this area is going a little bit too far in my opinion. So if we compare what the financial intermediaries are doing in the traditional finance, what they are trying to push in the crypto world, it seems to me very different. For example chain analysis tries to construct the entire history of your transaction of the coins that you have, and take them as drug money or whatever money. You all probably know that the paper bills we have, like the euros or whatever, they all have cocaine particles on it, because people use it for different purposes, but somehow we decided not to put this in a spectrum analyzer, that say: “Oh,  cocaine”, and take this as drug money and put it out of economy. So somehow the economies, the governments were wise enough to not go so deep, we have the technology for this, these bills they all have serial numbers. So it's technically possible to track them down to each individual transaction, but they don't do it for four good reasons, because it would be destructive for the economy, it would be distracting for the society. So they don't try to go so far. But for some reason with crypto they try to implement this.

So a lot of this I think is coming from technical people reading regulation that are written in like legal and financial wording and interpret them. A lot also is coming from this belief that because with the blockchain we can follow every transaction we should do this, while never in any law article it says this. So this is to me it's the problem.

So what I'm trying to do with the workshop is to is to build tools, open source free software tools that financial intermediaries but also people, individuals could use to provide proofs and to verify proofs, cryptographic proofs of origin of founds. So also a kind of shock for the traditional financial intermediaries is the in the crypto space we are like “be your own bank”, but “be your own bank” also means that you're your own compliance, and you only check what coins you accept, what coins you don't accept. And when you issue a payments you're supposed to provide the proof also to other financial intermediaries. And the traditional intermediaries they don't know how to deal with proofs issued by individuals. They are used to like a bank director plus another employee of the bank who manually signed some paper, that say, this man is legit coming from this source and blah blah blah. So they are used to this and they know that the director of the bank will go to jail if he do something wrong. Here you're your own bank, and you can provide this cryptographic signature on your own. So this is a little bit of shock to them. On the other hand we technical people, we understand that the paper with signature can be easily photoshopped or modified in many different ways, and that the cryptographic proof is mathematical proof that can be verified, and that will like basically verify or fail, so there is no like: “Mmm… 50% certainty”, or something like that it doesn't exist.

So I think we can do a lot by providing the right set of tools. So the workshop is about what tools we are using now. I'm working for a financial intermediary, so we use this kind of tools. So I'm explaining what we are using today, what we lack today. And the goal of the ongoing workshop is to create a set of tools, probably I want to build a association that will be a legal entity in Switzerland, a nonprofit association that will be just behind these tools to go talk to the other financial intermediaries and to promote these tools.

A lot of them already exist. It's basically the main tool is a wallet that can sign a message with your private key. So this already proved ownership over the wallet. So this is the core, the main functionality. Then we use blockchain explorers to see the all of the transactions that came to this address signed by this private key. So many of the tools already exist, some of them need to be built, some of them exist but only as a web service let's say, like public blockchain explorers. So we need to push more open-source blockchain explorers that can be run on the self-hosted server, because every time as a financial intermediary I am looking not on the blockchain, not on the blockchain copy that I have on my own full node, but on a blockchain explorer, I'm of course exposing customers information, private customers information, and I am exposing it to this public web service.

So many, many in fact of the of the software needed already exist, we just need to package it and to do a lot of communication and a lot of education to say that: “Oh you don't need chain analysis to red or green flag, you need some tools that enable you to understand the history of the transaction and to accept either refuse the transaction.

So please come to me at the Swiss Cryptoeconomics assembly if you want to talk about this, if you have ideas or software that you would like to contribute, please come to me and let's discuss it. Thank you very much. Questions, of course.

Audience: So what can you do with privacy-preserving money like Monero and stuff like that?

_polto:_ A very good question, thank you. So ok, so it's a very good question and I will use these to introduce also the one of my ideas. So first let's try to answer the question. If someone wants to transact with Monero with me as a financial intermediary I may ask him a view key, his view key, and he may reveal his history of transactions selectively, reveal it to me. Not to the entire world, but just to me. So the difference that I see in between like the good AML or the bad AML is the bad AML will try to outsource it to some kind of external API that will provide the score of the transaction and say like: “70 percent”, and me as a financial intermediary, I have to decide am I going to accept this risk that I don't understand which is just expressed as a percentage yeah. Or the good AML where you come to me with something that went through a mixer, I'm just supposed to ask you: “Oh, I see it went through a mixer. Could you provide me a certificate that proof your entries and outputs of these mixers, so that I can continue my job of proving your transactions history?” So if you wanted some privacy to the entire world but you agreed to reveal to me to transact, it's perfectly legal and fine, okay? So we don't want, and by the way in the traditional finance when you use the banking network, the banking network is not a public network, so nobody see your history of transaction, you reveal it selectively to the people with whom you, to the financial intermediaries with whom you want to transact. So the same is absolutely possible with crypto, with Monero with ZCash and any privacy preserving coin. Any other questions? Thank you.

_Diego:_ Thank you very much, just give him a hand.
