# Juraj Bednar

_**Critical Decentralisation Cluster 36c3 - Parallel Polis, Temporary Autonomous Zones and Beyond**_

[youtu.be/9-d_UAN9UoA](https://youtu.be/9-d_UAN9UoA)

_**Abstract**_

Cryptoanarchy creates spaces of liberty in the virtual space - encryption, anonymity, free trade using digital money. Can we use some of the principles to achieve liberty in physical space? How to create parallel social institutions.

_**Transcription**_

_Juraj:_ Ok, hello everyone, my name is Juraj and I want to talk to you about some experiments that we do in making ourselves more free in a project called Paralelni Polis, which will hopefully be on the screen soon. And what I would like to do today is to introduce you to the projects and some approaches, and how we're thinking about it.

So well Polis is a house, in practice this is the first space that we had now. We have Parallelni Polis in Bratislava and Barcelona, there's a project in Vienna and Kosice as well that is starting these days. So we are trying to bring and create these temporary houses of freedom in different cities in a decentralized way, so you can think of it maybe as a concept of either hacker space or fablab or things like these, that have some kind of identity — they're called something, they have a set of values, but each of them is independent and run by a different organization and different group of people.

So the house in Prague like insist of Bitcoin Coffee, which is the first script only cafeteria in the world the mobile version is there in the bag, you can visit Bitcoin coffee also here and this is where we introduce people to cryptocurrencies, to this way of life and these parallel structures. Then there's co-working space called Paper Hub, Institute of Cryptoanarchy, which is basically an educational institution and think-tank, and we organize Congress called Hackers Congress Paralelni Polis, which is cryptoanarchist conference.

So just very briefly this is how the house in Prague looks like. This is the Institute of Cryptoanarchy, and roots of this idea it's basically two roots one is cryptoanarchy and Cryptoanarchy Manifesto. The second one is philosophical Paralelni Polis. Just a short introduction. During the totalitarian regime in Czechoslovakia people want it to be more free, so they realized the philosopher Vaclav Benda wrote it in a in a paper that for example ok we have to go to this totalitarian schools, and we have to send our children there, and they're going to be educated in Marxism-Leninism and you know their way of life, but nothing says that in the evening we cannot bring the children to the kitchen and educate them in something else. So it's a way to build these parallel structures, in this case parallel education system, in a way that is not in direct conflict with the mainstream society, in this case the totalitarian regime. So it creates a parallel solution that can exist in parallel to this official or mainstreaming one.

Cryptoanarchy Manifesto introduced this concept in virtual spaces on the internet, so people would create these chat rooms, they would have anonymous identities, end-to-end encryption they started using digital money even before Bitcoin, there were several digital currencies, and you basically do the same thing but not in a physical space like a kitchen, where you educate children, but in a in a virtual space in a way that's encrypted and in some cases anonymous.

Very good analogy that will explain how conflicts work, because it's in a way conflict with the mainstream society it's called the OODA loop. The OODA loop is basically a set of four stages that both conflict parties execute in a loop. So first they observe, so they try to understand what is happening, then make some meaning, what it means to them, so that's the orientation phase, then when they have enough data they can use the data to decide on the next action and then they act. So the OODA loop is interesting because most of the people who try to improve their freedoms they attack the two last steps of the OODA loop.

So for example if you want to attack the decision part of the OODA loop you can change the law, you can appeal to Constitution you can protest lobby and so on in order to change the rules of the mainstream society. So the decision is in your favor so that's how you attack the decision phase. Other parties they try to attack the last step which is act. So for example if you are in a squat you barricade yourself and you make it very difficult for anyone to enforce the decision upon you. So they cannot actually act or date you, make it hard for them to actually act against you. For example, if you if a judge decides that you should be sentenced in prison for the rest of your life, and you escape this is also attacking the action part.

So what is interesting about cryptoanarchy and what we are trying to do is that we attack the first two parts not another last two parts. So by attacking the observer part in cryptoanarchy you use end-to-end encryption you use anonymity so you make it very hard for other people to observe what you are doing so if they if no-one knows what you are doing then it's very difficult to kind of judge it and make action about it. If they know what is, if they can observe that you are doing something but they cannot make sense of it. So for example you were wearing masks or someone just sees encrypted in communication but they don't understand what the communication means. That's at the attacking the orient part and that makes it for example one of the ways how to attack is this part is by making the actions not attributable to a certain person. So for example on the dark market when someone is selling something you can maybe observe the interaction, but because everyone is using pseudonyms you don't know what that means and who they are.

Another inspiration for us is Hakim Bey’s ‘Temporary Autonomous Zones’. It's a really good book, there's also a music version, so something like an audio book, but also with music by Bill Laswell, so find it on YouTube, it's very nice. And temporary autonomous zones is a way by which you can live as if you are free, because you are at least at the place and time free. And there are many ways how you can attain this status of living at temporary autonomous zone. So for example private music festivals and techno parties they are temporary autonomous zone, because you announce the location which is on the private land on Friday 6:00 p.m. So there is no judge to sign a warrant, there's no way how this, how for example police can organize to come to this place and do any kind of attack. So this is a one weekend long temporary autonomous zone, where people do various interesting things that are not allowed in mainstream society. Ethnic minorities they have it in a lot of cases a temporary autonomous zone. For example Vietnamese or Chinese communities often solve their disputes internally, so they would never go to state court in case they have any kind of trouble among them, so they try to solve these issues internally. Famous are secret societies and even mafia and gangs which are not ethical, but they kind of create these temporary autonomous zones for themselves also by attacking the OODA loop, because if you are part of the gang that means that you needed to commit a crime in order to become, there's a rite of passage, and it is very difficult to infiltrate these organizations.

So as I said we are building these zones and we are trying to increase our autonomy. So right now we are open sourcing the concept which is not very well documented yet but you can start your own parallel polis and we will help you with everything that we know. There are some very basic rules, for example, you only accept decentralized non-state money. But we would like to help bootstrap these parallel societies.

So this is a building in Bratislava, Slovakia, that we have. It's a same idea — different physical space — there's Bitcoin coffee and it's our temporary autonomous zones.

When I was talking about the you OODA loop, the conflicts are not always with the state, in our case the conflict can happen with the neighbors, for example, if you organize a party that is too loud, which is not a nice thing to do to your neighbors. But conflicts can arise from something like that you can have conflicts with a landlord, with the city, because you are missing some stamp or something, or the state. And it is very difficult to be autonomous in a permanent physical space, because these spaces can be surveilled, they can be observed. People usually don't wear masks, so they are a clear target for anyone who wants to start their other loops let's say. And it doesn't scale well, because if you want to create a new activity within the space, and you suddenly need a new room, the limitation is the four walls, so you cannot just like in a virtual space spawn a new container and run your new applications inside that container. So that's why we are thinking about container rising the physical space by using shipping containers.

This is another project by Polis in Prague which is a mobile version of parallel polis in a decent track. So it's a mini version that contains everything Bitcoin coffee, Institute of Cryptoanarchy, so there are a few cities in the world that don't have Parallelni Polis yet, so they can be served with decent track, but this has several problems. Normally you don't want to move once a week or something like that. So there's a lot of frozen capital because you need to maintain the motor there's a license plate and so on.

So achieving scalability modularity and semi permanence is by this wonderful invention which is a shipping container. Shipping container is very easy to move —you don't lock your capital in a physical building, you don't you know build insulation that you can cannot take with you, you don't build physical spaces in a way that are locked in the particular physical space. What is nice about shipping containers it's they're not that easy to attribute, they don't have license plates. It's a metal box that you can put somewhere. It's totally common shipping containers are everywhere, there are locations like ports where they're full of shipping containers and they're quite anonymous, so they make it hard to observe what is happening. You can stack them on top of each other which is good way to extend your space. So this is the transcending the limit of the four walls, because if you, for example, want to in Bratislava we wanted to introduce virtual reality, so in this case you can literally buy a new shipping container and start a really small business providing virtual reality. If you have new idea you want to do hydroponics or something like that, you can just buy a new shipping container and do it in there. So it's very easily scalable without raising the costs of rent and so on.

My inspiration for this talk is a temporary autonomous zone called Taz0 which is in Berlin, I highly recommend the cyberpunk bitstream podcast, you can find it on Taz0.org. They talk about these things in detail, so I think the average duration of the podcast is three hours, so I highly recommend it. And they also organize cypherpunk meetups in Berlin in a shipping container village. So if you're interested in this check their website — this is one of the rare cases how you can visit this temporary autonomous zone, because it's not public but these meetups are public. So they have a shipping container village that consists of six shipping containers right now, they have the public space, co-working, meeting room, gym in a shipping container. So this is where we kind of or at least me where I try to learn about these ideas ok.

This slide doesn't work, but what I wanted to show you is that we are in Bratislava, Slovakia. And Bratislava is right on the border with Austria and Hungary. So by creating this village in shipping containers what we can achieve — if we have problem even on the state level is, we can load the whole village on trucks, move ten minutes by car, and we are in a completely different jurisdiction. What is nice about this is that in this moment the most interactions with the state are completely reset, like you reboot the machine, they lose the state and everything begins again. So basically we can move every let's say four or five years to a different jurisdiction, so at the time when we come back to Slovakia we are all already old news, and no one remembers us. Also the question is who is us, because there is a guy that has a shipping container, there's another guy that has a shipping container, and there is no single entity, no single someone to deal with. Ok, there's the slide actually… so yeah this is Bratislava, and these are the borders with Austria and Hungary.

So also these zones are super modular, because as I said every startup can just pay rent, but be independently financed, independently managed — there is no need for like huge central decision-making regarding these modules.

So if someone wants to start kept up standing a shipping container, hamburger stand, bicycle repair shop, whatever people want to do, we welcome it because it's enhancing our life, because we get access to more services. We believe that these independence businesses around us would also accept cryptocurrencies, because they will be influenced by us, and it's kind of hard not to if you are surrounded by cryptoanarchists that talk for half an hour if you want them to pay in fiat, so this is the easiest way to make them shut up about their philosophy — just accept their Monero, or their Bitcoin, or whatever.

As I said, the space can grow around us, and we can have different rules for different zones. So some can be totally open to public's and some can be completely private as Nassim Nicholas Taleb said: good fences make good neighbors, but also trade makes good neighbors, so if your neighbors feed you every day with their super gluten free hipster hamburgers, then your friends and they are friends with you, because you pay them in a really nice anonymous currency.

What to build inside these shipping containers, just very briefly. There are many options what you can do, but you can start for example parallel healthcare providers, I would really like to see stem-cell treatments clinic in a high cube 40 feet shipping container that would be really cool. And you don't need much more space maybe in Trevino's bar would be a good cypherpunk idea in order to load yourself with antioxidants and vitamins you can imagine many other things. What we are already doing is we are using parallel financial systems which is really good because many of the rules of the current system are in a force to the financial system. So for example there is not so much new regulation about offshore businesses, there is some, but most of the rules are actually enforced by the banking system. So for example if you want to start a bank account for a company that's owned by a Panamanian resident and it's from Cyprus then they make it really hard to do, but if you generate the new cryptocurrency address you can do business and you're not breaking any laws, you just do what the companies are meant to do. Also inflationary tax is very easy to avoid using parallel financial system, you can create local pop-up economies which is what we are experimenting with now we started an internal token that is not an ICO, it's not any shitcoin properties, it's a way to reward our volunteers and then they can then use the token inside of our spaces. So if you want some inspiration Burnerwallet is a really good project that creates these pop-up economies, also Script is a good new idea how to transfer value. So with cryptocurrencies I think the most important property is the network effect, but that doesn't mean that it needs to be a global cryptocurrency, because if you are in a shipping container village and you know that you can pay with a local token it has the network effect of the village, and if you are physically there and then then you can use it anywhere that you want.

So this is an invisible picture of parallel garden, this is a visible picture of parallel garden you can create these hydroponic systems, there's Nadeem who's sitting there, who is one of the authors of this project it's an open source hydroponic system, so you can grow your food in the shipping container.

And last question is ok you don't have cords how do you enforce the rules, so that's very easy. First of all you make sure that being part of the village benefits the people, that means that they want to stay in, and if they break the rules if they don't get along with someone, they get kicked out and that's very costly. So if you do business with the people within the village you're lowering transaction costs, then people actually want to settle disputes because they want to stay part of the community. If you don't get along with some people on personal level which always happens if there are more than five people, you can be a hundred percent sure that two of those won't get along that well, just switch to a market API and you don't need to go to lunches with that person and you know drink and party with them, you can just you know pay for their services and you don't need close interaction.

So last few pictures: shipping containers are perceived as something that is very small, you can really build huge structures with shipping containers. This is a total must-have that we are including in our first version plan which is a sauna in a 10-foot shipping container. So this is one of the service that you can use you can create token, that you can sweat out in a sauna, so it's proof of sweat coin, which is very useful and it brings the community together. And that's my presentation and I welcome your questions, thank you.

_Audience:_ Hey, thanks for that. I was interested to know if you have any more examples around parallel healthcare where that's worked or where you've seen that be really successful.

_Juraj:_ Yes, healthcare is very, very broad topic. So there's health insurance, there's health care providers, there's medicine, so regarding medicine, for example, there are dark markets where people buy their medicine from countries where the medicine that they need is not regulated. One example would be getting CBD which is illegal in Slovakia, which is one of the probably the only country in Europe where CBD is illegal, so you can get it somewhere else. There are many cases of people who are buying medicine, for example, because it's not allowed in the US but it's allowed in Canada or vice versa. So access to medicine is one case. Healthcare providers… what is very important to realize is that the world is big and the healthcare market is big, so there is no reason to just because you were born somewhere to use the healthcare system of that particular place. So there are places where you can get much better treatment, for example, I'm resident in Panama. Panama has really good stem cell therapy treatments, people go to dentist to Thailand or Latin America. So it is I think the best from the individual perspective is to just look at the world as a big open market, where you can access healthcare. Of course, parallel healthcare doesn't mean that you have to choose among the official providers. You can go visit some crazy doctor wherever they are, and give you an IV of some super new crisper treatment, which hopefully soon arrives. So yeah and travel insurance there, sorry healthcare insurance, there are many global players in this market, and it's quite easy to switch them. So any other questions? Yes there's one in the front.

_Audience:_ Ok, so I was wondering how do you go about funding is your economy already strong enough to provide for itself or do you have donations or do you just pull your money together?

_Juraj:_ So our funding is very diverse. So we charge for coffee, we sometimes charge depending on which place we are talking about in Bratislava. We have entrance fees to our events, we have membership fees we have members of the board, who pay a little bit more and they help us finance this thing, we get sponsorship. So basically we try to get as much funding as we can. The only exception is that we don't take state or European Union money, so we are completely private fund funded hundred percent. Sometimes some small crypto speculation pays off which is usually by accident, most of the time we screw it up but that's one of the ways that it works. We also used collateralized loans, so we were locking in crypto and borrowing money in order to finance something when crypto was low and we were waiting until it goes back up in order not to lose the value. So it's very white topic, but what is nice about the shipping containers idea though is that you can also decentralized funding, because you don't need to go to a donor and sell them to this idea of a whole new parallel society you can say: “Oh, we are growing salads in hydroponics and finance these it's one shipping container these are the costs and you can do that. We also recently started doing crowdfunding campaigns which were quite successful and we were quite satisfied with the results as well. So with funding I would say go white and try whatever works, ok. I think we should stop here, I will be around here and of course close to the coffee machine. So if you would like to talk to me I'm around, and thank you very much.
