# Scott Beibin

_**Critical Decentralisation Cluster 36c3 - MandelBot:HAB - Open Source Ecotecture and Horizontalism**_

[youtu.be/lPFYjgq_XnU](https://youtu.be/lPFYjgq_XnU)

_**Abstract**_

Speakers: Scott Beibin

_**Transcription**_

_Diego:_ So I'm very proud of you guys for being productive in the meantime, but you worry, not you need to be productive no longer for Scott is coming to save us from ourselves to talk about Mandelbot. So Scott I mean I don't maybe this is a slide in your presentation introducing yourself, but maybe not so just introduce yourself to us.

_Scott:_ Hi, my name is Scott Beibin and I'm part of the Mandelbot project was started by Lucian Shapar our and myself back in about 2014, 2013, and we were building a 3D printer, a portable 3D printer for use in a stage show that I do called Groucho Fractal, which is a bike powered stage show, where audience members use brain computer interface to make 3D printed organic vegan snacks yeah. So it's an eco tech science mutant technology stage show.

_Diego:_ Can somebody get a picture of me with this genius for the vegan snacks.

_Scott:_ You're the genius genius.

_Diego:_ Oh, hey, yo, you stop get off my stage all right. We are up and ready to go. So I'm gonna go ahead and pass this on. Let's give Scott a hand as he talks with us about Mandelbot.

_Scott:_ Clicker. Oh excellent, ok, sorry, I'm so bad with technology. It's hard to figure this stuff out hi, so uh here we go. Oh graphics aren't even showing up, yeah whatever. So all kinds of technical problems we're here at a hacker con, we all know that we all have all kinds of crazy technical problems at hacker conferences, so Mandelbot:HAB is a continuation of a project that I've been doing for the past several years, it's called Mandelbot. The idea behind Mandelbot is to have a continuation of the I guess of the RepRap project, but also thinking about the environmental, social, psychological, and political impact of technology, while actually creating these things.

And let's go to another slide. There we go. So one of the main philosophies behind Mandelbot is that when designing these technologies it's really important to use scientific approaches to figure out what works. It's also really important to add a bit of artistry and a bunch of like a little bit of weirdness and magic and just kind of guess work and creativity of course. And as I mentioned before when we're putting these technologies out into the world, one of the things that might be good is to actually think about like well what actually happens like once we actually make this prototype, once we do this thing, if it's actually going to get out into the world, like how do we make sure that it's not going to destroy the planet, how is it not going to destroy the ecosystem, how is it going to impact things like people's work patterns or jobs or mental health. There are all other types of things like that. It shouldn't necessarily stop us from developing the technologies, but these are things I think that I would like to see people getting the practice of thinking about when actually making these types of things.

Let's see, ok, so some of the inspiration behind the project comes from old projects, new projects here you'll see, let's see this, there's this one image right over here of…. oops right over here, where the mouse is this is Arcosanti which is in Arizona. It's a project that was by a Paolo Soleri and a bunch of other people who helped him out. And this photo is by Masha Mitcova, who's here in the audience somewhere, hello Masha, thank you so much for taking the photo. Masha just went around over the past over the past several months traveling to visit all kinds of ecotecture projects, natural building and all that other fun stuff. So she might have something to say afterwards. Here's another project, there's another part of the Arcosanti project, this right over here, is from The Venus Project, this over here is an Earthship and this over here is Buckminster Fuller.

So you know let's see here we go you know in creating those of those projects, one of the things that they're thinking about is systems design and changes in patterns of consumption. So if we go back to the slide over here of the Earthship, which you can see on the upper right, that building is actually made from old tires, and earth, and cement, bottles, all other types of things that are being reused in a smart way such that they don't, that in a desert of New Mexico, where a lot of these originated, they don't need air conditioning, it's like you know passive solar heating, good ventilation, you know, just a really cool stuff, but just using the detritus of our, you know, kind of industrial age. How may I zoom over here. And in terms of what Buckminster Fuller was thinking about, is like how to create the largest impact, like efficiency based impact using the least amount of resources. So if you look over here at the fuller dome, you can see that it's a bunch of lengths of pipe that are connected and in this particular way and like well you know using triangles as a way of I guess having a very s having really good strength in the structure and adding a lot of surface area using very few materials here. I'll zoom over here ok.

So let's see — my background ok. So starting this Mandelbot project a long time ago, sorry like a few years ago, here you go with Lucian and I, originally started as a thing to use in the Groucho Fractal Show which is a kind of ecotech stage show that I've been doing for a while, where I go around and teach people about science and it's like educational it also Angus involves a bit of you know kind of activist thinking like you know how do we make effective social change, how do we make about effective environmental change now fun while doing it. And so Lucian and I kind of created this project together called Superhyper Innovative Technology with a very fun acronym, and we did this thinking it might be really funny to get into the Maker Faire with that particular acronym. And so several years ago we actually did manage to get this shady acronym over here into the Maker Faire. And over here what you're looking at is the third version of the Mandelbot portable, which is a folding 3D printer that could be assembled in a few minutes. It's less than a hundred parts, most of it is 3D printed and the printhead that you're looking at is the goostrider, because it extrudes goo and it's this are basically a prints with it, prints with almond paste, well I mean, I guess technically it's not just almond paste, there's also a little bit of apricot and salt in there for taste yeah. So and there's a joke in here as well so Mandelbot is a tribute to Mandelbrot, Benoit Mandelbrot, the mathematician who described the Mandelbrot set of fractals – fractals that are naturally occurring in nature and ‘mandel’ in German of course as we know is ‘almond’ yes. So basically making almond cookies on the Mandelbot printer, sorry it's a really bad joke anyway.

So here we go, this is the project, the newest thing, this is the Mandelbot:HAB. So Jake Clarke and I got together a couple of years ago, and they're like several other people who were involved in the project that I need to give a shout out to, as well who were these people ,yeah so the people who worked on this or Lucian Chapar, Adolf Alexander, Nick Rubin, Nathan Windsor, Esteban Reiberg, Tyle smoothie Randall yeah, let's see who else, Liz Cole and a few, yeah and Mark Ducia and Ed Cowans. So we basically put our heads together and thought like how do we actually create a cheap, easy to transport, lightweight, easy to assemble 3D printer for printing with natural materials. So this is what we came up with. Basically we're using staging truss, we just finally finished the CAD models, and we're about 20% of the way done on the prototype. This whole model is roughly like, the build area is roughly like five meters by 5 meters by 5 meters, and so it's like pretty pretty large. And here let's say what you're looking at is the beginning of a structure, maybe we could use this as like a stage for a DJ to play on or why not so you know if we have this at a festival, and you know people can play music. And then we can project onto the surface of the printer while people are playing which could be fun. But anyway like you can make houses over here, you could make columns, any other types of things. This is the printhead, so we don't actually have the printout that we've been working on in there, that's kind of coming up in the future. But essentially it's just a hopper, like a kind of a funnel with an auger on top, with an auger in it, and a motor on top so you basically just put a combination of clay sand and biomaterials in there. So you could use any kind of biomaterials like grass, or you know WASP which is a project that inspires us a lot in Northern Italy, they use rice hulls and they've done that in their in the project that they do called Gaya where what they did was they took the clay from the ground on the site of their factory, they dug it up mixed it with sand, mixed it with rice hulls, and then they printed a circular structure with it with corrugated walls and that was one of the primary inspirations behind us actually deciding to get this done.

So let's see, as I mentioned it's cheap in price, that's I can get… sorry we had a bit of technical difficulty, a little bit earlier, ok. So one of the things about this also is that the design for it was scalable, because we have this idea that what if like rather than just having an object you just make this printer and put it out into the world. What if people could make a custom sized 3D printer. So we put our heads together and thought like ok like these come in pretty standard lengths, what if we could just stretch it out, and just have people rent the parts wherever they are, like let's say they have our connector pieces, and then they just rent the parts from a from a staging supply place, and then they have them as long as they need them and then they bring them back and all they have or kind of our connector pieces, like the motors, the bearings, all the different things, the microcontroller. So they don't have to carry all this stuff around with them, then they can just rent it. So what it does is it decreases the ecological footprint of transportation, because these things are actually like readily found, and rather than people having to actually buy the staging, they can you know they can rent it or let's see so anyway. It's the idea behind it is to have it scalable, so let's say someone wants to increase the X dimension, the Y dimension, the height, but whatever it is. They can do that.

And one of the things that I've been very involved with over I guess you know later part I guess yeah most of my adult life is I've been involved in collectives. So in 2002 Liz Cole and I started a collective called The Evil Twin Booking Agency and we organized tours for public speakers like a lot of artists, activists, mad scientists, different people, and our decision-making process is thoroughly horizontal, like we don't have bosses in the organization, we have like several people who are working with us, and have a consensus process we have a kind of process that allows us to get things done kind of easily as we need. It's like sometimes like pure consensus, it's sometimes you know we trust each other to kind of get things done, and while having a lot of practice doing this over time you know I thought about like how do we actually like share these ideas in these things that we've learned over time. And the one thing that I keep up with after being involved in the kind of crypto scene for a while it's like well why don't we express these agreements that we have in these consensus processes in a smart contract. So the idea is that you in a program you scale the printer to the dimensions that you want, then you combine, you have the blueprint from it, the microcontroller programming, you combine that with the governance agreements that you have like let's say you have ownership types of agreements like that let's say five people own it. And you can express that in the contract like whether you have them as just a identified by a public key or you have them identified by name, whatever it is that you guys agree to and whatever configuration, and then you store that on a public immutable distributed ledger, I don't necessarily want to use the B word even though we all loved the B word sometimes the blockchain. But there are many different types of distributed Ledger's that you know that we can use for this. So after it ones being expressed as a smart contract you can trade it you can sell, you can do whatever you want with it, but it's just I guess a good way of it's I think it's a good experiment in terms of expressing horizontal governance. It some sometimes it's difficult to kind of have agreement with or to remember agreements that you make with people, and it's good to be able to refer back to that and not have to not have to rely on centralized storage, like you know if you're using some storage from a big company. I think it's preferable to actually store all that stuff via peer-to-peer, especially if you know if you don't necessarily want people to know what the agreements are within the organization externally.

Ok let's see, yeah, so once that's all done once you have the agreement it once of getting expressed as a nonfungible token, so you have this token that represents the object and that's the thing that you can trade. So let's see there are a few other aspects of it and I want to talk about. So we had an idea that rather than selling this as a printer we're probably going to sell them as kits, and also we want to give people the opportunity to make them themselves. So you guys could make your own Mandelbots and put them out into the world, sell them, we're probably going to be registering it as CC BY-SA. So that you just have to give this attribution, you can kick something down if you want to, you don't have to, and we're also planning on having a similar kind of marketplace like OpenBazaar where you'll be able to offer to build a Mandelbot for somebody, or maybe a 3D print a house, you can offer your services, or you could request services. And let's see and then we plan to take it out to festivals, eco villages, hacker camps and other types of places where we hope to build a community. So right now what we have is this, we have the CAD model, pretty much finished and we have a prototype as I mentioned which is about 20% done, we're hoping to have it operational by about February or March of 2020, and then bring it out into the world and sharing it. And if you're interested in plugging into the project, like whether you know doing CAD modeling, whether it's in designing smart contracts for something like this, if you want to learn about horizontalism.

And the last thing that I wanted to mention is that we're hoping to build a kind of a community, a kind of like open material science community, where we can examine the different types of materials that can be used, like the different blends of sands, and clays, and you know and biomaterials that can be mixed together in order to be printable, because so many of the blends that are being put together for 3D building printing right now are proprietary, and it's going to slow down the entire process of actually getting this stuff out into the world. Cement accounts for about ten percent of the greenhouse gases that are produced, because one of the main ingredients for cement is lime, and the way you produce lime is that you take limestone, you put it in a kiln, and when it breaks down it releases carbon dioxide gas and a lot of it, and it also takes a lot of fuel in order to break down, in order to break down the limestone. So you have this impact, it's just one way of making a binder for cementitious materials. We can do other things like there you can use basalt, you can use ash, and other types of things. So the idea behind the material science lab, this kind of decentralized and distributed material science lab, is to research the different blends that we can make and then open source those things, so that we can share the knowledge all across the world and hopefully print things out with Mandelbots, and things that are inspired by Mandelbot, that kind of bring it to you know further levels.

So that is a guess that's our offering to you guys, and there we go, this is another view of it. So again it's inspired by the RepRap project, it's made with staging truss, easy to assemble, easy to transport, low power consumption. We're also creating a micro grid for it. There was a really inspiring project that shot 2017 that we saw, which is alt power, and they did the micro grid they're a 42 volt, DC micro grid, it was super impressive. So we're thinking about utilizing that in order to power the printers, and it's also scalable.

Here we go and this is my contact information yeah. So I wanted to thank you guys. Do you have any questions? Yes great.

_Audience:_ Hi. So thank you for the great presentation

_Scott:_ Thank you

_Audience:_ I think it's an awesome project and I have a little bit of provocative question: do you envision Mandelbots becoming autonomous sometime in the future and what would that mean?

_Scott:_ Well so do I envision them becoming autonomous, well Jake and I were kind of joking around about actually giving Thierry Janssen style legs to the to the Mandelbot, so that they can kind of walk around and plop themselves wherever they want to go. So that might be a fun thing, so if there are any machine learning geeks here who want to create autonomous Mandelbots, it would be really really funny to have a kind of, rather than a critical mass bike ride have a whole bunch of the Mandelbots  taking over the streets yeah. Any other questions?

_Audience:_ Ok, if this is correct if the bot will like print the houses it would print like a plastic toy for instance, but do you know, if there are some tests with using these materials to actually create a house even by hand, like its prototype, how this material behaves or what are its thermal properties and so on?

_Scott:_ Yeah that's a great question. So yeah there are there's a lot of research already and a lot of projects that are already doing 3d printed houses. There's WASP who are one of there are huge, huge inspirations. There's another project called ICON, there's AI Space Factory and they're all experiment, and they're all experimenting with different types of cementish materials. And what you so far a lot of the success has been found in printing layer by layer, it's just like typical fused deposition modeling using clay and you know the mix other things in it you know. The people are experimenting with like putting metal inside of it and you know all the other types of things to keep it more structural. Just recently in I think it was in Dubai there was like the world's largest 3d printed building. That was done and that's you know to me it's like super impressive that they're able to scale and get you know get it uh you know get this stuff in you know, you're able to make like really big structurally sound things. At ETH Zurich they've been doing a lot of research as well with materials for 3d printing structure. So you can you know do a search on any of this stuff and if you want to talk to me afterwards, I can show you some photos and some video of stuff others have done. That's basically our main inspiration to like really feeling like this is very doable yeah. Any other questions before I get off the stage? So thank you guys so much, thank you, yeah, and a huge huge thank you to the Critical Decentralisation Cluster and to Marcus and Matthias and the rest of the team for inviting me, and Diego and for being a great host, and yeah and also to RIAT, if you get a chance to pick up a copy of future crypto economics, it's a great publication and yeah. Well thank you so much.

_Diego:_ Thank you Scott is giving us a round of super interesting stuff. We don't just open source code guys, we open source concrete. Ok, so it's fascinating, oh that's really really awesome. We're gonna take a five-minute break, we're gonna get set up for our next thing, we're gonna try our best to get back on schedule, but I think we're permanently behind forevermore, so which means tomorrow and the next day, and the next day will be even further, and further, and further behind until C3 is going to actually extend for an extra three days.
