# Gregor Zavcer

_**Critical Decentralisation Cluster 36c3 - Fair Data Society (Gregor Zavcer)**_

[youtu.be/uO4biD7CvS4](https://youtu.be/uO4biD7CvS4)

_**Abstract**_

Fair data society is a non-profit initiative working towards decentralized data commons that will provide an alternative to surveillance capitalism, the alternative being, a fair data society.

_**Transcription**_

_Diego:_ O’kay, well everybody thank you for your patience. While our team take took a much-needed break, but we are finally back. The funny thing is Gregor was not told that we were taking a break he's like all right guys I'm ready to go, we're like stand down there tiger. We were taking it a little bit of a breather and so he's just been kind of just hopped up ready to go this entire time, so he's gonna release all this energy on you guys, now he's gonna be speaking with us about the Fair Data Society, gonna be doing a cool little demo and yeah take it away and have a great time with him he's a good guy.

_Gregor Zavcer:_ All right thanks. So hello everybody, thank you for coming here. As Diego said my name is Gregor, I come from Fair Data Society and what the heck is Fair Data Society.

So before we go into that let's start with basically one premise that in the digital age freedom begins with owning your personal data. Now we had like today a really good talk from Alexei and there was a question about the whole legend like what does it mean like to own I guess in this sense this definition falls into the second bracket and hopefully it's going to be fine-tuned over the time by smart guys like Alexis. So it's about yeah autonomy and being in charge of yourself also in the digital space.

And why is this important, it's important because we don't speak so much about data slavery. So I would be very happy to talk about this, I spoke a little bit about this last year and but I don't want to take up all the time so in a nutshell we know we hear about surveillance capitalism on one side, we know and hear about dopamine economy where product design is done like this that we act like monkeys literally, and if you combine this it's like Shoshana Zubov says it's not only to control us it's about automating us so this is where we are going if guys like people like here if you don't do something. So and we are doing something.

And what is Fair Data Society. Fair Data Society is an initiative to build decentralized data commons. Now this is quite a mouthful and it's already because the slides are not updated there's already one error here. Fair Data Society is an initiative to build self sovereign commons. And what is meant by this, first what is commons? Commons we can see as a living social system where people address a shared problem in a self-organized way. So in this sense we can see like I guess we all here we are sharing the same problem, it's the data slavery this or the other way, and we are trying to address it in a self-organized way, and it's quite a dynamic thing, so it's a living system. And this is what we try to do. Fair Data Society aims to be the glue between the low level tech part and the social part, because also if we build unstoppable apps we need to think about you know like those boring things called ethics and how to prevent like not desired scenarios, and you know like this all Doomsday's scenarios, kind of thing.

So maybe first why Fair Data Society. Fair Data you can think about it it's a term that's getting starting to being used more and more, think about it like digital fair trade in the sense you know what is fair trade about it's against exploitation of the individual. It's about respecting human rights, it's about fair distribution of value. We don't have this in the digital space, we need something like that. So Fair Data is a very easy concept to communicate this, you can easily say Facebook I guess is not fair data you know.

So one big difference between fair trade and fair data is that in the Western world we have like this feel-good feeling about yourself you know if I support fair trade products and stuff like that because it's about the people in the other part of the earth you know it's like not really not really touching me but I'm just not such an ass consumer as you know by being using fair trade. But fair data is relevant to all of us, fair date is relevant to everybody who's active on the internet, who's active in the digital world, and in this way I guess it should we should all be thinking about it.

Now the other thing what decentralization and all this brings in is that collaboration is key. So what do we mean here the old paradigm is a zero-sum game you know monopolies market leaders etc. Here we need to think about what's called in game theory a stag hunt. Stag hunt is when together we can achieve bigger things. So and as community as the ecosystem we need to think how all these things work together: collaboration, interoperability, openness.

There are more, there is more there is Fair Data Society principles to start and align the community around the same or at least similar vision of what should be built. We are dealing we are asking the question what we are not so much addressing the question of why, because if you want to organize as a decentralized community we should just see the goal: different people different values in this sense.

So Fair Data Society builds on Swarm and before I go on or explain how many of you know about a theorem swarm decentralized storage if you could raise your hands. Okay so I didn't plan this but guys I guess it's time to get mind blown but not about Fair Data Society about Swarm. So its Swarm has been in the making for a while it's it has probably the most advanced and future-proof architecture how we should approach decentralized data, how data should be stored in a self-serving way and how can we establish systems where there's a single source of truth. So in a nutshell there's been a lot going on around Swarm, I if you're into this centralized storage, if you're about freedom about communication go to swarm.ethereum.org, and it's a good starting point. Let's continue because we have actually a lot to cover especially if you are trying to do a demo on these connections.

So besides this soft part, the social part, Fair Data Society also actively develops. This is the first application that was released back in March, we are iterating on it quite a lot, and it's about secure and decentralized file transfer: no servers, everything open-source, you know you can set up your own file transfer locally, download it from github you know in a couple of minutes or you can use our gateways. Why we did this? We did this because in the digital age we see that file transfer is on one side such a simple use case but at the same time it's a human right: everybody should be able to send a file to somebody else without being censored, surveilled or stopped in any kind of way, or basically fearing repercussions at some later point because living of some meta trail data. So it's like basically sending a file is in a way kind of precursor to also communication in this sense, so it's about freedom.

Now today we are announcing here in Fairdrop new feature releases. First I will speak about this a little bit later we will try to do a demo, it's what we call Honest Inbox, and I'll get back to this. The second one is so-called file pinning, local file pinning. And what local file pinning does for the first time now it's possible to guarantee persistence on Swarm which basically means that as developers you can start working on it, you can basically grow together with Swarm nearing its production release date. And at the same time already today because of that it's possible that you can use Fairdrop easily upload a folder connected to the ethereum name service and you are hosting a website that cannot be taken down. I think this is quite cool. So because there is a lot of websites that this or the other way are being taken down.

So what is Honest Inbox. I think we are to go back. Honest Inbox I will now switch to, if I can just a second… so I switch here before… oh but it's this is going to… Guys I don't think we will be able to do the demo, so… let's see… All right so this is Honest Inbox. Now what we see is I will skip I will skip the demo of sending a file it's very close to sending to using we transfer or any other apps. But this is something different. So every Fairdrop user now I created before, a user called 3063, so gets automatically if you type in the URL with the user, you see up there, okay, there is a landing page, and what does this landing page: do it enables me that if I share this address with anybody that they can send me the files or any kind of data anonymously. I will trigger now this demo, I tried it before here it actually took two minutes, so I might end up the talk earlier, so just please bear with me. So Scott if it's okay I will just use your presentation to send it to myself. I'm also a little bit it's difficult because I'm not used of this computer… oh, ok. So basically I only need to drag a file and it starts ending. And here it creates a throwaway account, it enables everything, deploys the smart contract, everything happens in the background, so it's actually going and going quite fast. The demo gods are being kind today. So… or not. Let's go back, we will return to this.

So next features, next project is what we call fare drive. If fare drop is secure file transfer fair Drive as the name implies it's like Google Drive, Dropbox etc. It's the evolution in this sense. And it functions in a similar fashion but it has also (how much? five minutes okay) but it is also some really nice interesting properties to it. It changes again the game theoretic setting, so it makes it first easy for apps to save and read data from it. It's a self sovereign storage for the user only you know we can speak of: your keys your data in this sense. So now imagine like all the DEPS producers when we speak about the great web as it was today called or web 3 you know it's like we see new user patterns, user design patterns emerging where the apps are being unbundled and basically all these DEPS want to have a place where to save the data. And now if you make a thought experiment, imagine all the data, all the apps saving data in the same spot for the user. Because you know if we are speaking about the user the biggest value for the user is to have the data, possibility to manage the data from one place. And now if I own this data it enables new kind of apps so-called zero data apps that run locally and use rich data sources – I can use effective data I can use eg data narrow data to drive my apps without exposing my privacy. So basically in our opinion it's when we sort out the storage we enable the way for developers to start developing new generation of apps, the ones that are fair data and that can use new kinds of data in a whole new ways. And here we come back to why collaboration is key – this can be done only if we come all together as a ecosystem.

So to wrap up I would really like to thank the awesome CDC team here, especially also the right guys it's like every year this cluster is growing and I remember when I had a talk here and there were like two people both my friends you know. So and this is I would also like to thank you for staying here, well there are so many other amazing talks happening, so thank you.

So okay. Now let's do, now let's check so we see here that the file was sent in the mean time now, because I created before the account, I will log in, well… okay these are some plugins I guess… All right and we see the Mandelbrot presentation in the received inbox of fair drop. So basically it works, thank you.

_Diego:_ Thank you very much. Did you see that the password was little stars instead of little dots - isn't that adorable, these guys are just adorable. Get on my stage. Thank you so much…
