# Deanna MacDonald

_**Critical Decentralisation Cluster 36c3 - Building an (Actual) Alternative (Deanna MacDonald)**_

[youtu.be/PirAFQMpQUo](https://youtu.be/PirAFQMpQUo)

_**Abstract**_

Privacy and freedom within the context of cryptocurrencies, zero-knowledge-proof systems, decentralised protocols and other privacy protection layers is about co-creating and co-shaping alternatives to empower individuals to control their own data. What is the role of Monero in building an actual alternative and preventing the public ledger from becoming another behaviour extraction and surveillance tool? As a community, what type of counter-narratives do we need to create to support this movement?

_**Transcription**_

_Diego:_ All right, now that we can hear me, I'm right about to sneeze; I could have done that before. We are getting ready for our last talk of the day, but it is not the last talk of our CDC, because we are gonna be back tomorrow. And we're gonna be back the day after that, and goodness if it doesn't even feel like we're gonna be back the day after that. For some of us taking down this thing, we don't get to celebrate New Years, this is our New Years. For others you guys get to go home and have great lives, and lucky get to be you and marry it fascinated.

So we've got Deanna coming up here. She's gonna be talking with us about building actual alternatives, she's gonna cover every alternative ever in history. So this is going to be a fascinating talk, it's gonna be a bit long. We've allocated the rest of our time here at C3 for this talk. I hope you guys don't plan to sleep. Deanna please tell us the alternatives of things.

_Deanna:_ Thanks, Diego. Hello everybody thank you for braving the last talk at CDC tonight. I will make it short and sweet, and do it just to kind of take you on a nice little narrative and a journey, and from there we can decide if we want to talk about it after, I'll leave some time for questions, or we can go have some drinks and get on with the evening.

So I essentially want to… I'm not gonna do any slides, I'm just going to just talk a little bit about building a counter-narrative, to see what we're trying to do. Generally speaking within kind of decentralized technology, zero knowledge proofs, within the entire narrative of pro-privacy development and privacy technology in general. And I am going to just essentially give my observations, some general postulations that I have, as I've been witnessing as a newcomer to the Monero community, but also just someone that's been observing for the last little while and seeing this community firsthand. So I felt I would do that.

So who am I, a bit about myself and why am I up here I've been doing this in the first place. I am academically trained as a global political economist. So I studied, I study a lot of policies, I'm a governance scholar, global governance is my jam, I love looking into the different ways and mechanisms in which we negotiate how to apply and use technologies. So specifically techno scientific governance and focused on AI, and I was drawn into the whole blockchain space and the crypto space in general when I started seeing this kind of ad-hoc formulation of different types of communities all over the world coming together and negotiating for themselves the ways in which we would for example deal in finance and in our currencies, or how we would determine what consensus is. So it's really drawn to this space.

And although while I've been working in industry for a long time, in really-really old archaic industries that are adverse to change, and I've been applying and scaling technology for several years in terms of renewable energies or protein separation, and most recently I've been working on applying blockchain in the real-world setting, because there was very-very little real-world blockchain, and I just in general didn't know if I trusted the technology, or if it could even be applied. So we've combined synthetic DNA and blockchain to trace bunker fuels, which is ship fuels for a new environmental regulation, that's finally coming into the shipping sector for sulfur. So I work with in compliance, but specifically with an environmental compliance. And I think blockchain for traceability is a great tool there. So I've been kind of in and around this the blockchain sector, and in the tech sector for a long time. We're working with industries that do not like change, and having to communicate change and create change is a big a big part of what I do. And in addition to that I've seen a lot of the comings and goings within this space, and I have a lot of kind of opinions in this area as well, so that's what I'll share with you today.

So generally speaking, I'm gonna draw from a lot of influences as well, I think we've heard it referenced quite a lot, but the seminal piece or the Bible I've referred to of our digital age or of this, of our age this year, “The Age of Surveillance Capitalism” by Shoshanna Zubov, I think is a great, great piece and book on privacy, on the future trajectory of our technologies, on how we're gonna go forward within the financial privacy context as well, and I'll draw tandems to that into the Monero community, I'm also very influenced by a lot of critical technologists as well, discussions on freedom, in the philosophical realm, so I'll bring a lot of these into play. And I think to ground it at the beginning, it'd be good to just… it's been happening on this stage a lot, I've seen it quite a lot through at the conference as well, but surveillance capitalism is a term that we're starting to use quite often, and I think it's a very important place to start: so what is surveillance capitalism, why does it matter you know, why is it something that we need to even be concerned with. So that essentially is you know the mining of our behavioral data, that our experiences as humans is now extending to the digital realm, our rights have not yet extended to the digital realm as well, but the mining of our behavioral experiences and our human data has been taken into a capitalist model, a profit from major that meat five major companies, the biggest companies we've ever seen in history, concentrated power and wealth have now been utilizing our experiences as humans and monetizing it.

Does that necessarily matter, is that something we should be so concerned about, a lot of people aren't, that's the narrative that I'm going to be bringing forward, and that's the counter narrative that I'm really interested in. So I think in respect to surveillance capitalism and why that matters, when it comes to our, for example, our private financial information that we've always had within the centralized authorities of banks, that we're now inviting you know the kind of deconstruction you know, how do we break down banks, how do we not have the third-party intermediaries, how do we build trust within in consensus, within our you know ourselves, in our technologies that allow us to transact with each other — these are all great questions, but in doing so we're also asking questions about our own financial privacy, and how we are going to be building the technology of the future that allows us to be able to either put that in the hands of corporations or put that in the hands of surveillance capitalism models, or allows us to negotiate how we want to essentially move forward with this.

So when it comes to I think how technology has been the trajectory that we've been on thus far, and how we built it, has been basically building the glasshouse model. So we have been building and deploying technologies for a long time in the sense of being users in the system that are essentially used, we have given up our data and done so in a way that we have gained back, we have gotten you know whatever service that we desire necessary or that we think that is important to have. But what I think is really crucial here, and now what I'm going to bring it concretely towards, is that we are moving into an age where we now need to define for ourselves as those building these systems, as those that are going to be utilizing these systems in the future, what it is that is really important to us. And I think this is something that I've personally come to really admire within the Monero community and within what has been built thus far with, and how it's being built in the conscious design choices that are being made by those that are developing and deploying this technology, and those that are utilizing it as well.

So I think this is something that we really need to discuss because what we're facing right now, when it comes to the you know the way in which we are now easily using technology or how we are going forward, is that we have lost our right to be able to make decisions as autonomous people, we are also starting to lose our self. And the self is very important, because when it comes down to it that's what we really have. And if we're moving into this digital world, into the next you know generation of technology, into the next era of evolution, essentially as human beings we need to start talking about what it means to have a self, and what it means to be able to transact with one of each other on any level.

And I think there's something that's really fundamental about blockchain, that to me had been what drove me to it in the beginning, that as in many respects falling apart, and that is essentially that we decided you know there's this amazing movement that had happened, within I say the tech realm of course, but it happened as well with this challenging of the notion of central authorities, of the concentrated power and wealth that it has accumulated you know, the financial crisis created a lot of these disruptions and these disillusionments. But then what happened is we said: “Ok, we're getting together, we're creating this new technology, we can define this for ourselves, we'll utilize this and the ways that we want to be utilize using them, we won't need third-party intermediaries or we don't need people telling us what to do”.

And essentially what I found throughout these years and what I've seen firsthand, is that you know a lot of these heroes or these people that we believed in and ultimately have gotten rich quick, they have found ways in which you know they've satisfied whatever it is they're working on, or they furthermore have been derailed, or had a lot of mission creep. And I think ultimately now what we found ourselves at the risk of is we've built transparent public ledgers which… we haven't necessarily questioned how we're utilizing them, what did… you know technology's not does not have politics inherently, artifacts don't have politics. But what we've been seeing is that there's either narratives that are being spun to discourage us from utilizing these technologies, because they're not in the hands of those have the power now, and secondly there's also the counter narrative that we're also faced with right now, which is that you know… the alternative that everybody was essentially building has fallen short, and I think, that's just maybe my personal opinion about this space, but I think in many respects what I was excited about is that we're actually building something that's going to matter, we're gonna be building something that we'll be able to negotiate on our own terms, how we utilize it and to have a bit more freedom in our society as to choosing how we negotiate our reality.

But what now I see is that we've been at risk of replicating the same system. I see shadow banking. I see people you know opting out of systems of financial crime and moving into others that replicate that a very-very existence. I see people that are against the financial system that have just replicated the same trading markets and the same speculative investment vehicles. I see a lot of the hopes and dreams that everybody had being essentially sidelined for the fact that we've been able to capitalize on this momentum in this movement, and then let's be fair, we've gone through such a crazy-crazy momentum — a lot has happened in these years, and a lot of a lot of interesting innovations has also has sprung up, and this is still very-very early days.

But when I essentially was ready to walk away from all of this — was just you know blockchain didn't end up being anything that I thought it would be — I had met the Monero community and that's the only reason why I'm still in this space at all, or why I think it was revived for me. Daniel mentioned it yesterday, why he likes the Monero community, I'm just gonna echo a lot of his points in that sense. I think it's a very first and foremost, it's not dogmatic, it's not ideological, I think the you know the ideological wars that we've seen throughout these years have only just gotten you know more worse camps, or camps, or camps not because something is valid or the solution technically as of superior status, or furthermore that it is something we would even use. With Monero community I think and with the developers in general, and with the idea is it's privacy by default, it's privacy by design, privacy is what we're after — it doesn't necessarily matter how we get there, it's the best solution put forward, the best technically and scientifically sound solution wins. And I think that's something that we can all stand to gain from, but it is something that also is furthering and advancing this movement in this technology in general.

So that first and foremost to me was my sounding board. But then actually getting to know the community, getting to know how people interact with and care about their opinions and work with each other, I think that's something that is also a part of the open source movement in general, and not necessarily only inherent to Monero, but is something that I think has been a part of this for me. So lack of ideology, the scientific and technical approach — that's all been great. I've also seen how Monero has been played out in the political landscape, I've seen how it's been played out in the journalist narratives, I've seen how it's also been opposed in many factions — and that's what essentially I wanted to talk about.

So we have built a system that's technically and scientifically sound and superior for guarding our privacy. When it comes down to it, this is how we should be building all technologies: we have our finances to consider, we have our you know… we just had a talk on messaging, we have our communications, we have our social media. I mean everything that we've been building; no one's necessarily come at it from a privacy perspective. And I think that is just privacy by design, the just inherent choices that are being made, there is a good straightforward way to start. But secondly is we're up against a system that has no desire for privacy to be included in development. We have they have no you know no real need for that to happen, because if it does happen it breaks all of the business models that every single technology firm has pretty much predicated their entire existence upon. So really what we're up against is how do we create a narrative, and how do we come up with something as a community, for pro-privacy developers that are up against kind of this surveillance machine that honestly we're not necessarily equipped to deal with, but how do we fight that, because what I've seen in Monero is something really interesting as well, as it's become plagued as the same, we've inherited the same narratives from military and industrialization on fear: it's the criminals that are gonna use this, that are using is this, is what will be used for you know all of the darknet, all of the illicit activities that are going on in the world, anybody that needs to hide something will be utilizing this technology rather than anybody that needs to actually preserve or wants to preserve their right as a human being, their fundamental human right to privacy is utilizing a suitable solution that is the best that there is for them. And I think that's something that you know just to start constructing around or start talking about it.

So what we need to do in that sense, we have we are at right now at a very-very interesting point in development, because we're starting to define the terms and negotiate the terms of not only our next generation of technology, but of just how society is going to function into work. So when we're talking about financial privacy, when we're talking about just our financial transactions on a general level, if I'm able to see into my friend's bank account, into my neighbor's bank account obviously that's a problem. If furthermore my regulators are able to understand exactly what my spending habits and my patterns have been, and decide that I can be included or not included in a certain process, that's another quite big problem. I think there's a war happening right now with “know your customer” and a money-laundering, so KYC and AML practices within the crypto space. And we're not seeing necessarily an argument that says how do we use the technologies, for example, a function of Monero, the view key, to be able to identify someone's transactions, whether they've been involved in money laundering, or furthermore to use them “know your customer” policy. It's not a matter of looking at it that way. Instead it's saying: how do we essentially see everything that is happening.

And we built transparent blockchains, you know Bitcoin the metadata associated with it does allow for everybody to be able to track and trace all the financial transactions of each individual down to the core. I grew up beside my company that I have in Copenhagen, grew up a sidechain analysis, I saw them vote from 7 people to 300, I saw the contracts they were bringing, and I saw exactly how this was changing. And what is happening when we start to analyze the metadata involved in our blockchains, and furthermore in our financial activity, the first customers aren't necessarily banks, which was a nice narrative again to spin, it was every in every body with three letter words that are able to track and trace and surveil. And when we're talking about surveillance capitalism, that's one thing, when we're talking about surveillance technologies, and when we actually start to discuss whether or not we are going to be able to actually exist as human beings in this world, in the next stage of our technological development, in the next stage of our development era, I think this is something that we need to start bringing forward as like discussion, just privacy in general, of course, but also negotiating the terms in which we develop.

And I think that's important, for when we talk about for example KYC, we're not talking any longer about KYC, we're now talking an AML, we're now talking about completely opening up all of the doors of technology, and all of the windows into all of our wallets, into our financial and our personal data, and to be regulating upon full and utter transparency. We have made these technologies, men and women create them, men and women can control them, but what's happening is that rather than having these discussions as to how much is too much transparency you know, what is just decentralization, when is it needed, when is it not needed, or how do we actually progressively create a new regulatory regime or new policies, or new financial regulations that are in place that deal with this entirely new breed of technology at hand, we're missing that conversation. And I think that's something that's not only important to start discussing, or just to even open up as something that we need to begin negotiating together. But I think it's important to also discuss you know how do we do that, how do we as a community of people that just in general want to protect our privacy, but beyond protecting our privacy are going to have to start answering these very fundamental questions. So how do we do that and how are we going to be able to step forward?

In that sense we have not only  right to privacy, a fundamental right to human rights, not everybody's granted human rights, not everybody gets human rights the way to be able to you know… not every state is going to necessarily implement human rights or observe them. But the right to rights essentially is you know philosophy on how we as citizens participate in and engage within the environment and the realm that we want to participate in. So if we are going to start beginning discussions on you know: I have a fundamental right to privacy; well I have to also be able to build that solution and system.

And I've seen that with Monero, I've seen that with the community they're taking the steps to building that themselves. But now what's I think the next stage is how do we involve a greater discussion in society, and how do we involve the multidisciplinary, and if the cross domain, and we need people in policies, such as myself, we need people that are willing to come in and just get their hands dirty and start talking about how you know how this affects them as individuals. I'm from a very-very small town in Canada, and I can go home and say you know: “I'm gonna do a talk on financial privacy in a conference soon”, and my grandma will say: “Oh you know I just talked to the Visa credit card people the other day, and they knew how much was in my personal bank account, and told me exactly how much I should give them per month in a payment. Why is my bank account attached to my credit card? How do they see that information?” So that's already starting to happen in the old school regime.

We're now getting into a new era where we're gonna be able to essentially… and I think Daniel and you said it well yesterday as well keep bringing this back to you, but we have the technology that is based on and you know chain analytics, we have data scientists, we have the ability to be able to see what's happening with people's financial data and with people's data in general, that is going to be put into the hands of the few the concentrated powers, that we are fighting against, are essentially now coming into this space are monopolizing, are regulating, are creating the policies. And furthermore beyond policy and regulation, and compliance are the ones that are going to be determining how and when we use this technology, unless we're able to start countering them, unless we're able to bring forward a counter narrative, that is fighting for not only our rights but also being a part of those discussion as to what our rights are.

And on that last note I think it's really important to start naming it, to start understanding what it is that we're after, and what it is that we're against. I think it's unprecedented, we haven't seen this before, we don't necessarily know where it's coming from, and we don't… it's something that has been done in the shadows. I think one thing that I've seen as well within the community is that in within Monero is people are ok in a counter movement, what happens to happen is you hide, because you are now a part of something that is deemed you know an outsider, or outside of the scope of what we are allowed to do, or furthermore in this case has been plagued with a narrative of criminality, and of you know only those that are trying to do illicit activities are utilizing that. The people are starting to accept as a means of adaptation to hide from what we are doing or what they're doing, and to hide and not bring this out into the open. And I think we need to name it, we need to understand it, we need to call it out, and we need to do this in the open, because adaptation name of hiding is going to risk us just being, just allowing this to happen and furthermore to be obsolete in the future. I think we need new forms of collective action from the ground up, and I think that is something that is easy to talk to most people about, whether they're technologically minded or not. I think there's a great ways to open up not only the discussions on privacy, on the technology that will utilize in the future, but just on a general level of discussion that we need to bring forward.

And I think one important aspect, and I'll end it on this, is we need to start creating the solutions that work for us, that's already hard at happening. Ok, so we have… I think many respects the infrastructure is starting to be built. And the infrastructure is incredibly important, it's incredibly important that it's being designed in this case, in Monero, with financial, the financial infrastructure that it's being designed with privacy by default. That from the very beginning you will be protected in your privacy is a part of this solution. So that's the great.

Ok, now what, now when we actually implement it, when we use it how do we build the pipes to that infrastructure, how do we ensure that we're able to actually transact with this currency in a real-world setting, how are we building solutions in even a business environment, and how are we also being able to deploy it in situations that it makes sense, or furthermore build solutions whether they're compliance solutions or new policy that it deals with our new systems that we're building, whether they're payment gateways, whether it's just even transacting or messaging within each other. We need to build these solutions from the ground up ourselves, and then we need to be able to open them up to the public. And I think that's something that… when we do that, and when we approach it in that way, and we do that a constructive manner, it's gonna be a lot more easy to tackle, but It's also of course providing us as a target.

So on a last note, rather than just adapting to the systems that are being trusted upon us, and rather than also hiding in the shadows and using this because it works for us as individuals, and we're okay with that, I think we can take a note from what you know just in general what Monero has done, and that's and that is very concretely that against everybody. I think this is something that I wanted to bring up to. So you know at Monero five-year anniversary, five-year birthday, fluffypony said it, and he said, someone said: “What would you do differently if you could in all the years that you've been working Monero?” And he said: “I would have prepared people us for the fact, that we thought we were gonna be heroes fighting for people's privacy. We weren't. Everybody hates us, everybody hated us, is turning out to be something that psychologically emotion, we had to prepare ourselves for that. I would have gone back and prepared people for, because fighting for privacy isn't necessarily the best or the most popular movement these days”. And I think that is a scary notion to think about. But on the other hand, we are the ones that are starting to define this, we are the ones that have the ability to be able to step up into also define this for the future.

And if we opt out what are we opting into, and that's a big question, and I think there are these steps that are being taken, and I think Monero is one of them. There are several other examples and different factions that we can utilize to say: “Ok, this is what I choose to use, this is how I choose to also interact”. But furthermore take more steps together. We have so many different resources that we can utilize, and there's a lot of different roles that we can play. I recognize my own role isn't necessarily going to be to build these systems, but it's also going to be to implement them, it's going to be to stand on stage and talk about them, it's going to be helped to develop the policies that support them.

And I think essentially that's really all I needed or what I wanted to talk about today. It's a historical context of seeing this rise and fall within an ideal that we thought we were building, that I don't think is necessarily achieved within this space. I think it's the revival of Monero or the revival of just those that are actually fighting, that are taking away their private time to fight for a space in the open, for other people to be able to have privacy. And I think there's a lot to be learned about that sacrifice, but also about that fight for the citizenship that we need to have in the digital era. And in order to have these rights we need to fight for these rights. It's not just gonna be handed to us, it's not gonna be given to us if the trajectory of technology is… it's already been is going to keep going the way, it is then ultimately, it's just going to be sitting, sit down and take it or fight for it in a way that I think we all can have, we have the skills and we have the abilities to do.

So that's that and I want everybody to have a great night. If you have any questions I'm willing to take them, you can discuss all night as well. I'll have a beer with you after, but that's my piece.

_Diego:_ Ok.

_Deanna:_ Oh every time doesn't never stop and…

_Audience:_ Thank you very much for this really refreshing approach, and especially because you take all of this words on stage, like privacy, and also like your approaches, I think what is like the best in a speech. I would love to invite you to the events that we organize, because we think this mindset has to be multiplied, and the question is about like have you experienced collaboration with this bigger cooperation's, with this mindset, with this kind of approach or are just still like having… ok, we take expect the best out of it, but we are doing the closed chain approach, and we do it, like you said, we place privacy afterwards on top of it.

_Deanna:_ Just to iterate, it's the question on collaboration?

_Audience:_ Yes, collaboration. If you have experienced collaboration like with this bigger cooperation's in a positive way, it's like anything that you could share?

_Deanna:_ Yeah, I think that's incredibly important in many respects, not only is it important because on a technical level. I think integration with several different systems is going to be an absolute requirement going forward, I think integration amongst any project or any system that has put privacy first and privacy by design as the fundamental pillars of how they've built these systems is something that I would utilize and could only benefit from if it were actually interoperable with other systems. So I think on a technical level absolutely, I think on another level we have… I think that's something that's you can start to see it in the cluster, I saw it last year to this year how much it's grown, as well with just having privacy focus and privacy oriented themes as a part of the cluster itself.

And you see that collaboration naturally emerged one of the discussions that had been taken places also what are our principles, because putting those principles out there allow us to be able to identify like-minded people projects and collaborators. So if the question is: do I believe in collaboration? Yes, I built my entire company predicated on that notion. No not only collaboration on a technical level, and worked with you know every project out there, and anything that works we use, but also in industry or in general settings as well, because we're all faced with this problem, every single one of us are faced with this challenge whether they realize it or want to fight for it or not. So there's no sense in any separation in that fight. It's only going to get harder, and it's only going to be a bigger challenge as we go along, and go forward. So it's absolutely necessary that we collaborate, because if we're after the same thing, there's no reason why we don't do it together.

_Audience:_ Hi. So sorry if I sound a little contrarian, but I think us, the crypto environment community, we need to be ready like at a moment's notice to onboard a billion people, because the other system is failing by itself, we don't have to do anything. I mean if you look around here, each and every one of you has more money than the United States government. They're like almost two trillion in debt right. So we need to be ready to onboard a billion people, maybe two billion people in the next five to ten years. I think that's the direction, maybe more people need to think how are we gonna do that. That's all.

_Deanna:_ Yeah, absolutely. I mean one… I like that perspective. It's not a battle it's coming to us he says. And I think that's true: build it and they will come. I think that's something that's the long-term approach that is taken by these that my peers that I'm able to see to build this is. I think the most important part of this is if it exists, there will be a wave, there will be the people that are coming towards us, whether we see it or not. I think it's not necessarily that this is a big war. I think there's gonna be a migration, because ultimately we're defining what new technology for the next era looks like. But how do we bring on that many people, that's the question. Scalability has been the biggest challenge in blockchain in general with distributed and in decentralized systems. How do you scale something on that level, when you've distributed it across the entire globe.

So I think that's gonna be of course the biggest challenge. And it's not just technical scalability, either how do you communicate this technology? We're talking about people having wallets inside of their phones and having to transact with each other or having to utilize something that they have no clue how to use. I see that all the time just explaining the technology and communicating itself, and also creating… we need UX and UI in this space, entirely and in general towards this. But how do we communicate, and how do we onboard the users is gonna be a huge huge element to all of this you've seen. You know: “What are keys? If I lose my keys I lose my money. I don't get that I have to write something down. I have to have cold sturgeon egg”. It's just there's a lot there that needs to be worked through before we're even close to being able to bring on that scalability.

_Audience:_ Now. You were talking about collaboration. Have you heard of Daniel Shmattenberger? Generator functions of existential risk. It’s like a podcast system, it basically resolves that all the kind of global problems like AI or you can reduce it down to… unless we evolved to only accept win-win interactions, whereas current capitalism is fundamentally based on win-lose interactions. Unless we transition to only doing win-win interactions itself act.

_Deanna:_ I like that. I wrote my master's thesis on existential risks, and haven't heard that before, but I think that's a very good point as well. It is not just a point but it is… if we have a decision we're faced with «shit or ship» right now, with giving up efforts over here or taking this other system — it's a glass house with no exit. And if we build the technology with a win-win in mind or furthermore solutions with that in place, then really you only have yeah the best outcome either way. So it doesn't matter what camp you're in or it doesn't matter what you choose, and collaboration becomes an inherent form of it. That's a yeah I like that.

_Audience:_ And my question is what are your thoughts about the non-privacy experts of Monero?

_Deanna:_ Yeah I like what you did there. Actually that for me was my… without having known anybody or even really been close to the movement at all, or within Monero, I think that was the only thing that I knew, and I think that's what everybody's faced with as well. And the non-privacy experts of Monero then essentially are those that are utilizing, I'm assuming or going in this direction, and the technology to obfuscate, to be able to yeah to illicitly move around or furthermore — there's a lot of use of this technology that is it was very detrimental. And I think that will naturally happen, and it has happened — the first adopters of every technology that we've made has like the first and most innovative adopters have been criminals. And I think that's something that is just naturally gonna happen.

But what to me is interesting in this as well with even Monero like, this is such a small percentage of the criminal activity that goes on in our day to day world. Like we have been faced with even, let's just take the financial sector for a second as a sector in general, and what they got away with my, bring it back to small town because he can, my uncle is retiring and he's going to be getting six thousand five hundred dollars a year in his pension, even though he's paid into pension his entire life, because they gambled it away, and there was no laws protecting him. So what do I think about the non-privacy users, a non-privacy oriented users of Monero, I think they exist everywhere and I think that any system that exists they'll be utilized for a bad, but and beyond that without this type of system there's no way to protect the good users as well. And I think that's something that's very important here, because if we continue to have the narrative that is driven solely by and inherited from the industrial complex or from the military complex, that is driven by fear and that is driven by the fact that criminals use us, then we are going to be put into a place where we're accepting what is offered to us, and we're accepting technology that is essentially or solutions in general, that essentially exploit us and take away our rights.

So I think that they are the reason why we have to fight because they're going to be what's used as the emblem of what it is, that you know why Monero shouldn't succeed, or why privacy or into technology shouldn't succeed, so that's the biggest narrative that we need to counter for sure. Great.

And now officially I'll let Diego and my night.

_Diego:_ Thank you very much, let's give her a hand. Thank you Deanna. I really wish I had the humility to give off the same kind of vibes. You know this is a this is a conversation, I'm not talking at you, we're talking with each other, but I enjoy the spotlight too much for that. So I am talking at you guys, and what I'm saying right now is that we are at the end of today. So you are all free to go do as you please, go explore the rest of C3. For those of you that you just can't get enough of our content, I know we are keeping you from the rest of this entire conference, I release you now. You can go, you can see everything else that has to offer. All that slightly inferior content out there. You can go check all of that out now.

We will be back tomorrow with a lot more things. Go to decentral.community to see what we've got lined up for tomorrow. We got a lot of great talks, we got more workshops coming on. So I hope you guys come back, and I hope you enjoyed what we got today. I want to give a great big thanks to the audio team, to the team that's providing the stream for those that could not be here with us here today, and to all of our speakers that spoke today. Can we give them a quick round of applause. Just everybody thank you so much for all of your hard work, we will see you guys tomorrow bright and early.
