# Drew Fustini

_**Critical Decentralisation Cluster 36c3 - Linux on Open Source Hardware and Open Source Chip Design**_

[youtu.be/BvbUfEeUqAw](https://youtu.be/BvbUfEeUqAw)

_**Abstract**_

This talk will explore Open Source Hardware projects relevant to Linux, including boards like BeagleBone, Olimex OLinuXino, Giant board and more. Looking at the benefits and challenges of designing Open Source Hardware for a Linux system, along with BeagleBoard.org’s experience of working with community, manufacturers, and distributors to create an Open Source Hardware platform. In closing also looking at the future, Libre Silicon like RISC-V designs, and where this might take Linux.

_**Transcription**_

_Diego:_ You know, don't ever let anyone tell you that technology has come far, ok. Like so there's so many problems, half of the calls on my phone are spam, half of the users on Twitter are bots, half of the emails you get are spam. Don't ever let anyone tell you we've come a long way. We've still got a long way to go. Maybe Drew can give us some solutions, maybe he can't — it's not what his talk is about. Oh wait, open source hardware an open source chip design? Ha. Ha. Ok, so we're talking about something completely different than what was on. Oh it is the same thing? Ok, so see, when we say: “Fill out your title for your thing in our form up there, you put in this title”, and you put in a different title here. Ctrl+C, Ctrl+B. You don't ever say that technology or people have come far, because we have not. I'm just kidding. So I'm gonna hand this over to Drew, let's give him a great big hand. He talks with us about open source hardware. Big hand! Big, big!


_Drew:_ I am Drew Fustini. So this talk is gonna be about open source hardware, specifically Linux open source hardware, which I forgot to write there. And originally I was saying Libre Silicon, but it turns out there's actually a group called Libre Silicon, so I'm gonna use the term “open source chip design”, because I don't want to confuse people that it's about that group specifically.

So I work for a PCB manufacturing service in the US. Also part of the BeagleBoard.org Foundation we make small open source hardware Linux computers, and I'm also part of the Board of Directors for the Open Source Hardware Association, which I'm going to talk about in a bit.

So how many people have heard of open source here, like open source software? So probably most of us you know at congress here. So examples of open source software, if you haven't heard of it before: Apache web server, Linux operating system, Android, large parts of Android open source, also the thing underneath it is Linux, LibreOffice, which is like an alternative to Microsoft Office, I used LibreOffice to make these slides, Firefox, the web browser.

So I wanted, before I talk about open source hardware, I just wanted to go into what is open source, in what is open source software. So open source it refers to something that people can modify and share, because this design is publicly accessible. So with software we're usually talking about source code, and you have source code that anyone can inspect, modify and enhance.

There's also the idea of free software, which is more of a philosophical idea around these four essential freedoms: you can run the program as you wish for any purpose, then you can study how the program works and change it so it does your computing as you wish, and you can redistribute copies so you can help your neighbor, and you can distribute copies of the modified version of the program.

So when we're talking about hardware, some people use different terms. I'm gonna just use the term “open source hardware”, and I want that to be inclusive of the idea of free, libre and open source, even though those terms kind of have different philosophies behind them. In the terms of hardware I'm gonna just use the term “open source hardware” to keep it from getting confusing though. Some of you might know that there's different philosophies behind those terms, but I'm just gonna conflate them into one term to be succinct.

So what is open source hardware? So we came up with a definition about ten years ago at an event called the Open Hardware Summit. Bunch of us got together that we're doing hardware at the time, and wanted to kind of make a definition for what we meant when we say “open hardware”, “open source hardware”. So it's hardware whose design is made publicly available so that anyone can study, modify, distribute, make, and sell that design or hardware based on that design. Also I should have mentioned before, there's a lot of links in these slides, I put the PDF up on GitHub, and also if you go to the page for this talk, there should be a link to the slides in there as well.

So I mostly do electronics. The open source hardware is about more than just electronics, mechanical designs, all sorts of things, anything that's physical, that you build could be open source hardware. But in the context of electronics a practical example is what are we talking about, we're talking about publishing the design for your hardware. So this could be the schematic, the board layout, and the bill of materials or the parts list, what parts go into the project. And when we're talking about the schematic and the board layout, we're not just talking about something like an output format like a PDF, or an image like a PNG, we want the editable source files. So if you're using a program like KiCad or EAGLE, this would be the KiCad file or the EAGLE files. And the reason for that is if you want to enable people to modify that, make derivatives, then having the source file so the CAD program is much more useful. Another thing to note with the bill of materials is if you want other people to be able to build your project, it's good to use components that are available in low quantity or even single quantity from distributors. Some chips you know you can only buy like in a million volume or something like that. So if you want to build projects that other people can contribute to, it's important to make sure that they can build it themselves.

So how many people here have heard of Arduino? Ok, so a good number of you. So Arduino is a really popular microcontroller board, there's workshops all around congress with it, there's one called “Arduino for Total Newbies” in the hardware hacking area. So this was a board that was created at a small school in Italy, think definitely over 10 years ago now. And the reason we all know of it is because they released the designs as open source, at that time it was good enough to do a lot of projects, interactive electronics projects and things like that, and they shared the design, and they shared the source code for it. If you go to the link in the slides, there's a good documentary done back like 10 plus years ago about, the original team in Italy that did it, which is quite interesting.

So how do we know that Arduino is open source. So probably the most popular board the one picture there is the Arduino Uno. So if we go to Arduino website, we can see that we can download the CAD design files from EAGLE, so we can download the schematic, and inside that EAGLE file zip is the board layout and the schematic.

So we're talking about publishing your hardware project is open source, you need to choose an open source license. And this can get kind of confusing, because there's a lot of different options. So there's a suite of licenses from Creative Commons, some of which are open source licenses. So common one you might see is CC, Creative Commons, BY, which means “attribution”, and then SA, which means “share-alike”. One thing to note is if you see NC that stands for “non-commercial”, and if you use the non-commercial clause, that's not compatible with the definition of open source. So some Creative Commons licenses are open source some are not, they have different use cases. You can also use things like Copyleft licenses or reciprocal licenses, which we see more so in software like GPLv2, GPLv3. There are also permissive licenses, like Apache and BSD, and MIT. So people are using all these licenses for hardware projects, and then there were licenses that were created specifically for hardware projects, which I'm going to talk about mostly is the CERN, the physics laboratory created one called Open Hardware License, OHL. There's also one called TAPR, and one called SolderPad. But I want to talk about the CERN one, because I think that's one of the more popular ones, and CERN put a lot of effort into thinking about what's a good license if you want to publish your hardware project as open source.

So they have the idea of an Open Hardware Repository, where you know they're designing all these different electronics for their particle detectors and things like that they want to share with other laboratories around the world. So they have this Open Hardware Repository. And they created the license out of that to have a license for the designs that they were publishing in the repository. Javier Serrano is one of the people that runs the group at CERN that does this. If you click on that link in the slide, there's a good interview with him about why CERN is doing this and their motivations.

So licensing can get confusing. There's also copyrights and patents. At the Open Hardware Summit a few years ago Ari Douglas gave a nice talk that kind of reviews different licenses, in kind of tells you about what might work well for your project, in your situation.

But what is the point of all this, what's the point of open source hardware? I think the point of it is you want to publish everything that will enable collaborative development. So why would you publish your hardware design? It's because you would want to have other people contribute to your project. And I would say if you're just doing it to kind of put a label on your project that it's open source, that might not you know be the right thing for you. The really key thing here is that you wanted people to help contribute to your project.

So there's the Open Source Hardware Association which I'm part of, one of the board members of. Mathias help running this cluster is also part of it. And this came out of this annual event we have called the Open Hardware Summit. So we're a non-profit in the US. The 501(c)3 means we're a federal nonprofit. So we can get donations, people that donate things to us can deduct that from their taxes. And one of the things we do is we host the definition of open source hardware. We also have things on our website, which I should really put there, it's a oschwa.org, if you type in oshwa.org you'll find the website.

So we have things like “best practices”, if you're doing open source hardware project, a quick reference guide, a checklist, if you want to go through and make sure you're publishing everything that's needed to be an open source hardware project. And one of the main things that OSHWA does is we help run the Open Hardware Summit, which is an annual event that's been happening since 2010. And we have it coming up on March 13th in New York City. So if any of you can, it would be awesome to see you there. It'll be our tenth one, in fact so it's gonna be our tenth anniversary.

One of the things we did this year, we didn't have a summit this year, we skipped this year and instead we did a thing called Open Hardware Month. So we wanted to have people around the world organize local events. And this was really cool, it kicked off with some events in Vienna, and in Colorado in the US, and then we had 40 events in 14 different countries. This was things like meetups, and talks, and workshops. So we'll be hoping to do it again next year, so please check out. Hopefully you can see it there, it's ohm.oshwa.org. We'll be doing it again October 2020, and hopefully we'll get more people involved around the world. If you're curious of what happens at the Open Hardware Summit, we have all the talks from the last one which was in 2018 online. So if you search for Open Hardware Summit on YouTube, you'll find it.

So one of the things we did with OSHWA was we wanted to have a way for people to make it really easy to identify that a projects open source hardware, that it conforms to that definition. So we created this thing called the Open Source Hardware Certification Program. As a self certification program you just go to certificate.oshwa.org, and you can fill out a form, which would name your project, description of it, the license you're using, point to things like your repo, where you have your design files, your documentation, and what license you're using, and then you get this logo here. So there's a two letter for the country code, and then there's a ID number, sequential ID number. So we did a badge last year for the Open Hardware Summit, and I registered it, and it was US 0071. And I put that on the silk screen. And the nice thing about that is if you get this board, or it's on the packaging, some people put it like on the packaging or like little anti-static bag label that you’re your project might come in, you see that you can go to a certificate.oshwa.org and look up the project ID, and find the documentation, find the design files. So it's useful both for the hardware designer, the person making the project, if you want people to be able to find your documentation and design files easily, and for someone that's looking for a project, it makes it really easy to identify that the project is open-source hardware.

So if you are interested to learn more about OSHWA, we have a mailing list that you can join. You can also join OSHWA as a member, and we have the OHSummit on Twitter is probably a good one to look at, we'll have a lot of news about what's going to be happening at the summit coming up. And the executive director of OSHWA Alicia Gibb is one of the people that started the summit, and she's our current executive director. And a few years ago she wrote a book called “Building Open Source Hardware”, and has essays from a bunch of different people that have done different open hardware projects. So that's a good thing to look at, if you're looking to learn from other people's experiences.

So my two favorite things are Linux, the operating system, and open source hardware. So I wanted to talk about different projects, that you can run Linux on open source hardware.

So one of my favorite things is the Novena laptop. This was created by Bunnie, who gave an awesome talk on day one here, and Sean Cross goes as xobs, who's also here. And they wanted to create a completely open source hardware laptop that they could use for the different projects that they work on. So this was a great example where you know they designed everything the motherboard, everything was all designed and released, the design files for it, and they had some cool stuff like an FPGA and a software defined radio. I need to add a slide for this. This was probably about five years ago. They are doing a current laptop that's open hardware called the Reform, and they're all the way in the back here behind the stage, Lucas from MNT is back there, and he has a really cool kind of the successor to the Novena laptop called the Reform. And it's all open hardware as well: the mechanical design, the electronics and everything.

One of the organizations I'm involved in is beagleboard.org. So we're a nonprofit organization that helps design small computers. That ranges from everything from makers to educators, to professionals building products around it. So what we do is we work with different manufacturers and our community to get these boards manufactured.

So it started off with the BeagleBoard which was kind of one of the first low-cost ARM development boards back in 2008. I mean this was important at the time — free software and open-source software developers need to get their hands on ARM boards, so they could start building their software for ARM. Now we take it for granted that like Debian and Ubuntu, and all the different software runs on ARM, but back then it wasn't necessarily the case. And then we made a smaller one called the BeagleBone in 2011. I don't know how popular it is here, but in the US there's these little mint tin called Altoids, so the board fits in the mint tin.

Then we came out with the BeagleBone Black, which just kind of had better specs and cheaper price in 2013. I bring this up because this is probably the most common BeagleBones if you ever seen a BeagleBone project, it was probably using this board. So these boards are all open-source hardware. All the designs, the board layout, the schematic, the parts lists are available. All the parts are available from distributors like DigiKey and Mouser in quantity 1. And because it's open source, there's many different companies that make different versions. So Element14, SeedStudio, SanCloud, Arrow — they have different versions with different features. So that's kind of the cool thing about open hardware. Like Seed was like: “Oh, we don't want HDMI, we'll take that off and it'll save money, it'll be cheaper”. Arrow wanted to do an industrial one, so they bought industrial temp chips, which makes it more expensive, but then it serves the industrial market. So the idea being open hardware allows them to create different versions for different use cases.

This is a board we created for robotics projects. One of the neat things about this is we started using this chip that integrates a lot of different electronics into one package, called the System-in-Package, and this meant the board design was much simpler.

So the other BeagleBone like the BeagleBone Black, it's kind of a complex circuit board. It's using chips that are made for like things like cell phones and thing get pretty complicated. The nice thing about this one is a simple four layer board, which means that you can use it in simpler software like EAGLE.

Then we made a smaller one called the PocketBeagle. And the cool thing about this one is that we also publish the design files in KiCad which is an open source circuit design software. So we don't lower the barrier to entry like with so now we have the PocketBeagle, it's a four layer board that's designed in KiCad so anyone that wants can download KiCad, open up the design files and modify them. And the fact that is four layer means that it's simple enough, that if you wanted to you could get the circuit board made. If you have a little bit of experience you can go over the hardware hacking village and learn how to do surface mount components. You can with like some practice we actually assemble one of these boards on your own.

And one person that did was one of our Google Summer of Code students a few years ago, Kumar, he wanted to make a logic analyzer based around the PocketBeagle. So he took the PocketBeagle schematic and then he added on the stuff he needed to make a logic analyzer. He also added on Ethernet jack to it, and this was really cool to see someone take the designs and modify them for a different use case. And he was one of the finalists in the Hackaday Prize which was pretty cool.

We just launched a new board called the BeagleBone AI. It just has more capabilities, more features, also open source hardware, but I don't want to continually talk about BeagleBone because there are other projects. Here's a good example here. So we registered this I think in the summer, and we got US 000169. So as close to maybe like 200 designs have been registered in the US, and you can go to certificate.oshwa.org and look at different countries. I think after the US and maybe Germany one of the top countries is Bulgaria which is pretty cool, because it's kind of a small country, so there's a couple people, they're doing a lot of open-source designs.

And I mentioned Bulgaria because a really cool open hardware company there is Olimex. And they have a line of boards that come on Linux called OLinuXino. Here's a really cool blog post that the creator or the founder of Olimex wrote Tsvetan about open-source hardware and why it matters. You can go to Olimex go to the blog, or you can click on the link in the slides there.

So one of the things they did a few years ago is they wanted to make a 64-bit ARM board with one of the Allwinner chips, and they wanted to design it in KiCad. So I think previously they were using some other proprietary CAD software and they wanted to use KiCad because it's open source. It’s Tsvetan who is the person that runs Olimex. He gave a great talk at FOSDEM a few years ago about the process they went to of switching from one CAD software to KiCad and their experience of designing this Linux capable open source hardware computer. To me this is kind of like the one of the like a goal for me — I want to see boards that are designed in free software, that can run free software there in the hardware itself is open source.

So if you haven't heard of KiCad before or KiCad people say it different ways doesn't matter, it's an open-source EDA suite, so it's an open source CAD program. So if you've heard of EAGLE or Altium those are also CAD programs that people use to design circuit boards. But this one's great is cross-platform, runs on Mac, Windows and Linux. One of the coolest things that's happened in last couple of years is organizations like CERN has developers working on it now. Also recently the project leader Wayne he just got hired full-time to work on the project. So it's kind of growing up from one of these things where everyone's working on it in their spare time to now people are actually working on it is their day job which is really cool. If you want to learn more about KiCad search for “Getting to Blinky” on YouTube, it's a great tutorial you can go through over a weekend and learn how to make a little circuit board.

One of the things that Olimex did was they took that board, the design and they put it into a laptop. So they wanted to make a kind of a open source modular laptop called the TERES I. So you can find out more information on that, that was a few years ago. You know there was an event coming up called FOSDEM in Brussels, and I'm hoping to go to and I they might have new stuff there.

One of the other open hardware projects that I was a big fan of was the CHIP computer, which you might remember. It made a lot of news I had a big Kickstarter it was called “the nine dollar computer”. They were a small company in Oakland, they did a Kickstarter, it happened in 2015. Unfortunately the company went off a business in 2018. But the cool thing was because it was open hardware, they had the schematics, the PCB, the bill materials all released under the Creative Commons Share Alike License. People were able to take the designs and do all our things with it. So do I have a picture of it? Well it's kind of there. So one of the thing I did was… oh, here it is. This was really cool. So the little, little circuit board is the chip. But they made this thing called the PocketChip which is a really cool like little portable handheld Linux computer. So you could basically have your little Linux computer in the palms of your hand. It was a really cool design. I'm pushing like the chip when went away when the company went out of business.

But people still had pocket chips so a person named Christopher Alessandro, he goes by Groguard, took the designs of the chip and then his own version of it that plugs into the PocketChip. And if you click on the slides you can see a little demo of him running DOOM on it. So that's kind of like the standard demo is you can run DOOM on your on your little Linux pocket computer I mean.

If you want to find out more about the Giant Board it's also open source hardware, so Christopher went out to make a little tiny one that fits into a really popular form factor for boards called the Adafruit Feather form factor, any recently did a crowdfunding supply campaign for that, so that's called the Giant Board and which is ironic, because it's very small.

So one of the other things that I'm very excited about and this is kind of a thing that's come out of a lot of people here at congress is the idea of open source toolchains for FPGAs. There's an open FPGA assembly here, there's also a lot of people working on this stuff over in the hardware hacking area. So there's now a couple FPGAs where you can use completely open source toolchains to program them. And one of the things that this lets us do is put a processor core on the FPGA that can run Linux. So there's a board called the Orange Crab by Greg Davill. He's here at congress and yesterday he actually got Linux running on this little tiny board. The Orange Crab, I don't know there's a picture of it, so it's a little board in the Adafruit Feather form factor, and this board is running Linux. We got Linux booting on it yesterday, so if you check out Greg on Twitter you'll probably find them somewhere in congress, you can see the Orange Crab yourself.

Radiona is a hacker space in Croatia, and they created a board called the ULX3S, which has one of these FPGAs that's supported by open-source toolchains and can run Linux. One of the people that did a lot of the software development behind this is David Shah unfortunate he's not here, but he's developing a board called the Trellis board. That's going to be kind of a higher-end board with like I think I could get gigabyte of DDR memory on it, so like pretty decent amount of memory. And this is another board that can run a Linux core, that can run out soft core that can run Linux.

Recently back in November, Hackaday had a conference every year in Los Angeles in November, and the badge this year had an FPGA on it, and the FPGA was capable of loading a processor core into it that could run Linux. So I have that with me. I'm still trying to get that working on the version I have here, so if you're interested find me later hopefully I can show a demo of that.

And I mentioned Risk-V so what I wanted to jump into next is talking about open source when it comes to chip design. So if you've heard of you probably all heard of Intel x86 or ARM, those are instruction sets, those are the instructions that are processor execute. So a group out of University California Berkeley created something called Risk-V. So the cool thing about Risk-V is that it's a free and open source instruction set. So means that anyone can take this and implement it. There's no royalties. If you make an ARM chip you have to license the instruction set from ARM. So you pay a certain amount per device and you also can't necessarily like modify it the way you might want to.

One of the cool things was there was a group in Columbia, at the University of Columbia that created their own microcontroller based on Risk-V which was really cool to see. Now it’s unfortunately not big enough for capable enough to run Linux. But it was pretty cool to see them do open sourced chip design based on Risk-V.

There's a organization called lowRISC in the UK, and they're looking to make a system on chip or SOC that's Risk-V based that's capable of running Linux and doing something like a simple smart phone.

There's an organization called the Free and Open Source Silicon Foundation or FOSSI, and they're kind of similar to OSHWA, but they were focusing on open source chip design. And they do a great job of organizing conferences throughout the year. So they have a conference called ORConf which happens in Europe every year, and then they also have a conference called LatchUp that happens in the US. They also had the week of open source hardware in Zurich this past summer. So they host a bunch of different events. If you go to the FOSSi Foundation on YouTube you can watch all the talks about all the different sorts of things people are doing with open source chip design. One of the other things they do is they host this website called LibreCores, where people can share their chip designs or the modules for the chip design. So when you're trying to make an open source chip design, you don't have to design everything over again like the memory controller, the different peripherals and stuff like that. The idea with LibreCores that people can share the designs of different parts of the chip.

So what about actually making chips based on Risk-V. So there's a company called SiFive that's actually making chips that can run Risk-V. This is a microcontroller but they ended up coming out last year with a chip that was a capable of running Linux. So they have a chip called the U540. So it's a 64-bit Risc-V chip that's capable of running Linux. A lot of people at SiFive are working on getting Linux working on that platform.

Well so this is the board here, it's a really interesting board. So it's a multi-core board that can run Linux on a Risk-V processor. The one downside to it is very expensive because it was made in low quantity. So it's unfortunately it's $1000. So right now we're in a position of there's not really any commercially available low-cost Risk-V processor that's capable of running Linux. All the ones that are out there microcontrollers, they don't have enough memory or processing power to be able to run Linux. So I'm excited to hopefully maybe in this coming year see chips come out that would allow us to do, to build boards that could run Linux. That would be in my mind I would like to create a Risk-V based board that run Linux for less than $100.

Now one route is to use FPGAs. The downside of that is that they don't run particularly fast, because they're soft cores, they're not hard silicon. So like the board that Greg has the Orange Crab is cool but there's only running out like a hundred megahertz so. Maybe by 37c3 there'll be some Risk-V chips out there that are capable of running Linux, and we can design an open source hardware board that they can run on. So if you're interested in that too, please get in touch with me. In lieu of the silicon we can start hacking on boards that have FPGAs on them. This is a link to the slides, and then I think I had 30 minutes, so I don't know, do I have time for any questions? Ok, so if anyone has any questions? All right I don't see anyone, I don't think. So all right, thank you very much.

_Diego:_ Thank you, Drew. Thank you everyone who clapped for Drew. And thank you for Drew's research for being presented on.
