# Cheng Wang

_**Critical Decentralisation Cluster 36c3 - Proof of Less Work (Cheng Wang)**_

[youtu.be/r3rTrgoXjAU](https://youtu.be/r3rTrgoXjAU)

_**Abstract**_

I would like to share my work on reducing the energy consumption of PoW without sacrificing security. My new type of algorithm is called PoLW, inspired by the recent work of Itay, Alexander, and Ittay. For a practical system where mining is profitable, PoLW might actually improve network security.

_**Transcription**_

_Diego:_ If proof of work is your thing, you're definitely gonna want to stick around for this, we've already got him all set up, stream is still going, everything's good right? We can just go from one thing right to another. I'm just gonna go ahead and pass off the mic to you. You can start a couple of minutes early. Anyone who wants to speak with me, I will go ahead and be back there, so we don't interrupt his talk, if you have any further questions. Thank you very much.

_Cheng:_ Thank you. Ok, so I just get stuff, that is my recent research about the proof of work. So as we all know that nowadays proof of work is criticized a lot for being used massive of energy of the world. So here is some estimations, probably you have already seen this before, so this is the energy cost of Bitcoin is like 0.3 percentage of the total and electricity produced by the world every year. I am not going to say that is definitely very bad or something, maybe security has a cost, maybe this is kind of the cost we need, I don't know. But for my work is we trying to reduce the energy cost, to see where we can coverage.

So the first question is — do we really need this much energy. So here I have some observations. The first observation is the hashrate of Bitcoin actually doubled this year, right. So the interesting thing is if it's secure in the early of this year, if Bitcoin is secure in the early of this year, it means right now actually half of the energy is wasted, if we only care about the security of the blockchain right. Now the second point is the hashrate of Bitcoin Cash is only 2.7 percent of BTC. So it means actually is very easy, seems it's very possible to do a 51 attack for BCH. But we don't see it happens yet, but only several known miners they did once to reverse some buggy transactions. But here the situation of for BCH is a little bit more complicated. I just state the fact, it maybe that is kind of protocol if as some other factor, for example, for Bitmain is actually the biggest you know the miner behind BCH. And also we have another tradeoff between energy consumption and the confirmation time. If we want to really reduce the energy consumption and accept that we can make the confirmation time a bit longer, it's also a way to reduce energy consumption right.

So my talk is about how can we reduce the energy consumption of proof of work by just improving the algorithm. We don't argue about how much energy should we really have to secure Bitcoin. It's just given that we have Bitcoin network right now, have Ethereum network right now, can we improve the algorithm and then reduce energy consumption.

So proof of work actually has two parts right, main two parts. So the first one is the hash algorithm. There are different options to use nowadays. The second part is the algorithm itself. There are different type of algo, Bitcoin is one of the simplest one, Ethereum has something more complicated. So in the talk I will discuss both two parts, and to see how can we reduce the energy consumption.

So the first is the hash algorithm. I want to know if we a hash algorithm matters in the energy consumption of proof of work? So first let's also take a look at the example — Bitcoin and Ethereum. So here I took two points from a website, I don't have time to show the graph for the whole year, but actually I selected randomly several points, and the result seems to be quite a close. So basically the results is for the miners, for every dollars the miners get from the block reward, the electricity cost for Ethereum is around 80% of the electricity cost of Bitcoin. So in by looking at this well we can only say that actually Ethereum right now is a little bit energy efficient then Bitcoin. But it actually we cannot say definitely — the hash algorithm is the key point, because it could also be that because the market cap of Ethereum actually, not the market cap, because the reward of Ethereum is much lower than the Bitcoin. So it means miners might want to spend more energy mining Bitcoin, because the revenue, the absolute revenue is still higher.

So here is a bit more analysis of the hash algorithm, the role of hash algorithm in energy consumption. So first in theory actually the hash algorithm should not matter, because in theory the you know the marginal cost should be equal to the marginal revenue. So if we assume that the energy cost dominates the mining cost the, it means that a hash algorithm shouldn't matter. But in practice I think hash algorithm matters, but I'm not sure how much this, because the cost of hardware is different, and also the cost to build a mining firm, and also maintain a mining pool it's different. Personally I feel like for example or memory bound or like even storage bound proof of work might be efficient than the pure ASIC hash algorithms, because they will be some like delay time in the memory bounded algorithms.

So the first part is about hash algorithms and then the second part is about pure algorithms itself, peer-to-peer algorithms itself. So how actually, what is PoW actually, the role of PoW bringing in blockchain. So basically it provides two things for blockchain. The first thing is decentralized randomness. So here it is, it means like is a permissionless network, and every node can join freely, but still we have algorithm to select a leader, random lead by using PoW. So I think still PoW is one of the most robust the way to provide the decentralized randomness. So for PoS you can do this, but the problem is the either you let other like stakeholders to be able to be the leader, then the problem is the process will not be a like PoS (?) process, really means like there will be a lot of blocks proposing in very short amount of time which is definitely not okay. And the other type of PoS algorithm is the network need to collect more for example two, two over three signatures from the network. So this approach has the problem of like catastrophic crash, issue it basically means like the network never collect enough signatures for one block. But for proof of work is really a Poisson (?) process and is very robust.

The second thing about PoW, it provides very high, needs very high mining costs for new block. So this kind of provides security for the blockchain. So here is the thing is actually for decentralized randomness we don't need too much of energy. It means that actually the hashrate, when it reaches a sufficient enough of a hashrate, the block time, we are kind of the average, very average. So for this we don't need too much energy cost. But for mining cost actually, for Bitcoin, for Ethereum, is highly related with energy consumption.

So let's see what's the mining cost means in the security of blockchain. First the mining reward in the ideal or in the theoretical case, or in the equilibrium case, the mining reward actually will be equal to the mining cost. Or if you cheat it, if you consider in the economic setup, you can say the marginal reward, our revenue is always equal to the marginal cost. And the energy dominates. So it means if we give less reward from the blockchain, then it means there will be less energy cost. But the problem is of course is not to secure, the mining work is lower.

The mining reward depends on two things — the number of rewards, and also the coin price. So let's see how Bitcoin and Ethereum decide the mining reward. Bitcoin it halving every, around every four years. So actually you could reduce energy consumption if the price cannot double during the halving, because then the actually the cost of mining reduced. But the problem is why is four years, it's not three or five years, and why the reward should be like halving is not another ratio. And Ethereum has fixed amount of block reward. So the actually the problem is the energy consumption grows linearly to the coin price. Let's imagine that if the price of Ethereum goes up like always goes after the energy cost will always goes up as well. But of course Ethereum they very like to do hardfork. So when they see something is like not sustainable, they may hardfork it. But the thing is we may need to consider a better way or a more adaptive way to change the mining reward, and also make it more sustainable in the long term right.

So what is the relationship between rewards and the security. Let's consider two types of adversaries. The first one is the revenue seeking adversary. So for example it can hack, could try to attack the network, so that it could get more block rewards by rework the other new blocks. And also it could do double spending attack. So here for this kind of attack, if we can reduce the revenue, then it means the security can get higher right. The second type of adversary is called the sabotage adversary. Basically this attack it does not care about the value of the network, it just tries to destroy the network. So for this kind of attack if we can increase the upfront cost for many new blocks, then we can get higher security.

So as I said before for decentralized randomness we don't need too much energy cost. But for security reason we still need a very high energy cost. But actually we can do better. We can get decentralized randomness with proper energy cost and we still keep the reward or keep the upfront cost at very high level. So the trick is we can move the cost of mining, part of the cost of mining, from the physical world to the network side. So here in the research we say that we can move the external cost to the internal cost of the network. So external cost is mainly energy consumption, but it also includes some other like hardware investments. The internal cost is basically you spend coin or burn coin, or anyway you like, or even distribute your coin to the other node in the network. In this way the coin of the miners got reduced. So by this way the miners could shift a part of the external cost to the internal part. Sum of the cost is still the same as before.

This research by several people from Israel. They propose the first work of this kind to reduce the energy consumption of Bitcoin and Ethereum. But the work is very early and it has some drawbacks. The first one is it only works for Bitcoin, and I have like several parameters to tune it. And also the distribution of the coin is not so practical. I will not go deep into it.

So here I will introduce my work is called a Proof of Less Work. So assume that the coinbase reward for a blockchain is one coin, just one coin. So the miner actually can claim to only get half a coin by burn 1 – α coin so that you could get some extra weight to the hash value it produced. So basically the idea is in theory I need to spend almost or close to one coin to get the block reward that is also one coin, and almost spend is many the energy cost in the physical world. But here I only spend part of the money in the physical world. In the same time I burn like 1 – a coins, 1 – α coins inside a network. So for me the cost is the same, but the hash value will be weighted. So in this way is kind of very very similar to the physical world. I will later explain the difference. So here we can introduce a weighted function is called f applied to 1 – a. So basically if you burn 1 – α coin, you get f applied to 1 – α weight. And we can easily, based on this weight formula, we can easily calculate the maximal or the optimal strategy for the miner to select the α.

Of course we have plenty of options for the weight function. So here we can see two very typical functions or very common functions. The first one is called a Linear Proof of Less Work. With this one actually the optimal strategy and also the equilibrium strategy is to choose α to be 1 plus γ divided by 2. So it means like the I first need to burn around 1/2 or 0.5 coin, and mine in the real world, so that I can get one coin back if I make a new block in the network. And the second tab is called the Exponential Proof of Less Work. So basically the weight is an exponential function. With this the equilibrium strategy for the miners is to claim only 1 divided by γ coins, and the rest of coins will be burned. So with this two type of algorithm the external cost can be reduced to effect close to 1/2 or 0. But in practice is a little bit different, because proof of work first, because the energy cost for different miners is different, and also people, how to say, an estimation of the return of the coin in long term is different right. Some people they mine the coin many maybe it's just for the long term return right, they mine the coin, they keep it and for sale later. It depends. So it could override. And so by saying this I mean actually proof of work it's not just for security. Actually it's also a way, how to say, is the kind of way to distribute a coin. So kind of here you need to balance the external cost and the internal cost so that you can like incentive wise people to join the network. Otherwise if the mining profit, if the external cost is very low close to zero, the problem is it will goes to the equilibrium states very very quick, the convenience will be very very quick, because the bar of mining is so low, everybody can join it, so the profit will go to zero, the hash rate will stay very low from the very beginning, and then it means like in long term the hash rate cannot increase. But at this point the security is not decrease, but in long term you cannot grow your security. So that will be a problem. So in practice you need to set proper lower bound forever.

So here's the demonstration of the energy consumption raise the reward. So for the normal PoW is actually the energy cost will be like linearly proportional to the reward. And for linear PoLW it will be half and before expand exponential PoLW it can be like logarithm to the reward. So you know you can actually reduce dramatically amount of the of the energy cost. So let's take a Bitcoin as an example. So Bitcoin price right now is so at this stage, Bitcoin spends like 0.3 percent of the energy for of the total electricity produced by world. If I assume that we don't have a halving, and the price of Bitcoin goes like 10 times up, and then it means the energy consumption of Bitcoin will be 3 percent of the total electricity produced by world. So this is definitely not gonna be okay. And actually in this way you will make the mining become a bit more complicated, because the profit is high, and the governments or people will start to blame like it costs so much high of energy right, it’s hard — definitely we can see that is not a sustainable way right. But yeah with PoLW we can reduce this drama, and it is also very adaptive. You can set up the lower bound and then you can make actually the lower bound. Actually you can make it, we can't decide it based on the actual mining hash targets, this will be kind of related to the real-world coin price. And then you can make it very, how to say, along with the real-world cost.

So now let's take a look the security part. So because if you apply PoLW instead of pure proof of work it will actually reduce the entry barrier of mining, because here you don't need to invest like that's amount of hardware as the pure proof of work before. So actually it could make the network a bit more decentralized depends on your setup. So it will definitely introduce more people to join, to try to get the rewards. If we take first to take a look at the revenue seeking adversary, because in the equilibrium states mining profit it will always be close to zero, so the security is the same as the proof of work, PoLW is always the same as PoW. But in practice is because mining still is a little bit or like depends on the timing is always profitable. But as I say that actually Proof of Less Work we are lower mining barrier, so the real means like the competition will be higher. So the revenue will be slightly lower than before. For example let's say Bitcoin right now the revenue is like one coin for each block then the miners they reduce the energy cost to 80 percent of right now, so the reward is still one coin, but they need to burn a little bit to keep the rewards still the same as one coin. Then in this case actually there are still some extra mining hash power not being used. And the miners you see, mining still profitable. Then they will use the extra mining power to try to get more reward. So in this way the revenue we will be actually reduced, so the security will gets higher. And the second type of adversary is the sabotage adversary. So the upfront cost for one block for PoLW is still one coin, because you need to cost half a coin in the physical world, and the one miner is the other coin burn it, so that is the same security as PoW. So in practice it is a bit more subtle. If we just consider one block so actually PoLW increase the upfront cost, because the revenue gets lower. So it means you need to spend more. But it's a bit more subtle because if let's say if the attack want to do a 51 attack, then it means actually if one of the branch got attacked, it got reworked, the other mining cost, the energy cost in that branch we have this disappear forever. But here is because we use less energy there, and enemy is actually, the cost, if one of the branch get disappear actually, the cost is lower. But we here, we can make a tradeoff. So here is a bit how's the controversy, because some people say that when a branch or when some block is getting off, we don't want the miners, how to say, to waste the hashrate they cost right. But some people say that because this could be a tag, we want this to be wasted, so that's the network is secure you know. But here for PoLW you can always make this tradeoff, you can select both according to your kind of preference.

So the summary is we propose to improve PoW to reduce the energy consumption. And it’s very simple and it could work for all DAA. It means we can use it for Bitcoin, we can use it for Ethereum. And DAA is pretty important for security of pure PoW, a network. For example selfish mining is very profitable for Bitcoin in theory, I'm not saying in practice. But with other type of DAA like Ethereum actually is less profitable. And our arguments you only need to add just one parameters based on the actual hash difficulty, so is very and very simple, and also automatic. It's also very adaptive to the price change and also the sale pressure is lower, because the reward actually is lower. You only get half a coin back buying in Bitcoins like you burn, you spend the energy and then you get one coin back or 1.5 come back and then you need to sell this in the market to keep running right. But with this the sell pressure lowers. So I think it is kind of make the system can be more sustainable, especially when the cost, when the price is you know it's going down. Yeah the most important thing is it actually reduce energy costs without sacrificing security. There are something for discussion. As I said earlier is we can burn 1 – a coin first and then we receive for one coin. But actually you can design the coin make it make the miners receive only half a coin targeting the miners don't need to burn the coin in advance. So but the with this change the upfront cost will be different. So it's kind of tradeoff. If you think still like half a coin is enough to secure your network against the sabotage adversary, you can do this. But it's optional, it depends on the really the tradeoff the how the designers make it this tradeoff.

Ok, thank you that's my work, yeah, I'm ready for questions. Thank you.
