# wilder

_**Critical Decentralisation Cluster 36c3 - Achieve Economic and Personal Freedom Using Globality**_

[youtu.be/1xlXYsqW4MI](https://youtu.be/1xlXYsqW4MI)

_**Abstract**_

How to achieve both economic and personal freedom using globality and flexibility.

_**Transcription**_

_Diego:_ Alright everybody, we are ready to go with our second-to-last talk. It is Wilder from Parallelni Polis, he is gonna be talking to us about opting out of the system which was the theme last year, but it's still relevant this year just because the theme of C3 changes doesn't mean that our needs as humans change. Now I want to point out one thing before I hand over the microphone. I don't know if you can see the bottom half of this screen but there is 54 likes on this public presentation. There are 54 people just like yourselves that think this presentation is worth listening to and is really good. So that's how we know it is 100% approved by 54 people.

So I'm gonna pass this over to Wilder, he's gonna talk with us about opting out of the system, achieving blah-blah-blah-blah, using blah-blah-blah-blah-blah. Here you go.

_Wilder:_ Ok, thanks a lot. This is like the last minute presentation, I'm really happy that you're here, only a few people are sitting here, so I would appreciate if this presentation can be like interactive. So if you have any question, anything, just raise your hand, stop me and I will be happy to answer to your questions.

So the name of my presentation is “How to achieve both economic and personal freedom using globality and flexibility”. Firstly I like to introduce myself. So I'm a crytoanarchist which means that I strongly believe that crypto technology can help us to achieve more personal economic freedom. My technical background, I am computer hacker, so I have two ethical hacking companies, IT security companies. We do like ethical hacking especially in Central Europe. I'm also the co-founder of multiple hackerspaces in Prague, also in Bratislava, maybe you know the Paralelni Polis which has pretty unit in Prague, Bratislava Vienna and now also in Barcelona. I'm also the member of one Czech contemporary artistic group and responsible for many anti-government and digital privacy projects.

But what is the most important is that I am like a perpetual traveler. So I spent last five years just travelling, moving all the time. And because I'm geek I was thinking how to achieve most freedom in my lifestyle.

Ok, I would like to start with this optimistic Hans Christian Andersen quote: “Just living is not enough… one must have sunshine, freedom and a little flower”. So if you want to have more freedom in your life or in your society, you have multiple options. Let's describe these options. The first option is a traditional one — vote every four years with the weight of your vote less than 1 to 1 000 000, which is case for Slovakia and most countries in Europe Union. So this like a traditional option. The second option is to be activist, organize many anti-corruption demonstrations, create petitions for the better governments and try to improve your government. The third option, probably unpopular, is just become the politician and try to change your system from inside. And the last option what you can do, and this is exactly what my presentation will be about, is how to opt out of the system and just don't wait for any approval from democratic masses, be global, be flexible grasp the current crypto technology and all legislation loopholes or legislation possibilities, and be free just now.

So this is the topic of my presentation, I'm going to explain you how to choose a suitable country for your permanent residency, how to choose suitable country for a company, why it's really important to eliminate center of your interest in your home country, so it means that you have to divorce, you have to sell your properties, become homeless, why it's necessary to close all your bank accounts, switch to crypto completely especially to truly anonymous cryptocurrencies like Monero for example, how you should choose global healthcare insurance provider, how to choose world mobile operator, how to embrace sharing economy and use it in every country, and also the last thing how to help all your friends to opt out of the system like you and move to parallel society.

Ok, so let's start with the first point. So the question is why we should change our permanent residency. So I'm going to describe you my situation, like I'm Slovak citizen, and I had my residency, permanent residency in Slovakia. And it was definitely not a good idea because of the following reason – the first thing is that because of my permanent residency I have mandatory military service. Despite the fact that Slovakia, also Germany is the member of NATO in case of any military conflicts, for example, someone besides at attack at Germany or Slovakia, you have to go to the army just because of a permanent residence in Germany or you have permanent residence in Slovakia. Another thing is that if you are permanent resident of Germany you have to choose from the oligopoly of few companies, few health care insurance companies, just German companies. When you opt out, when you decide to give up your permanent residence in Germany, you can choose from the global market of multiple global health care providers. Also tax residency. The thing is that if you travel a lot like me for example, and you don't stay in any country more than 180-183 days which is more than half year, it doesn't make sense to have any permanent residency or tax residency just because you have obligation to pay taxes, and legally I don't need to pay any tax, you don't stay in any country more than half year. Ok, another thing is that if you have tax residency for example in Germany or Slovakia, you have to tax other income, including your crypto income. So for example you are a holder, you have a lot of Bitcoins, a lot of Monero, and you want to sell it to fiat, of course you have to pay 20% from your income if the value of Bitcoin or value of Monero will go up in the following years.

So the thing is where to choose the permanent residency. So I recommend you to choose your permanent residency according to the two facts. The first fact is you should prefer the country with a territorial taxation. What does it mean territorial taxation. It means that in these countries you have an obligation to pay taxes only from a local income, not from your foreign income. There are many of such countries like Costa Rica, Gibraltar, Hong Kong, Macao, Malaysia, Nicaragua, Panama and so on. And also you should try to choose countries with a double treaty agreements with your home country where you want to do business. So for example if you're a Czech citizen, and you have customer in Czech Republic, it is good to have residents in Hong Kong, Malaysia, Panama, Singapore, if you're a Slovak citizen, this country or Hong Kong, Malaysia, Singapore, what does it mean, it means that if you are for example if you do business in the Czech Republic, and you issue the invoice from your Panamanian company to any Czech company, this company can use this invoice as an expense. So you move money to Panama, in Panama it's zero tax for foreign income, so basically you don't need to pay taxes.

So I personally decided for Panama. So at this moment I'm still European citizen but resident of Panama. So I decided to give up my residence in Europe because of multiple reasons. And the reason why I decided from these like list country's just for Panama out because I have a lot of good friends in Panama. I speak Spanish, also Slovakia, as well Germany there are on “friendly list” of Panama. What does it mean, it means that if you are German for example or Slavic, or European basically, you're on the “friendly list” of Panama, and when you ask for a permanent residence in Panama, you can get it for unlimited period. I mean forever basically. So this is especially good because for example if you are from Colombia, Venezuela, Nicaragua and these countries, and you are asking for permanent residency, you get it usually just for two or three years, and then it's really difficult, very handy to renew your permanent residency for another three years. But this is not your case, because we are, you are positively discriminated from the “friendly list”.

Also Panama's is territorial taxation country, so you need to pay taxes only from local income. Another cool feature of Panama is they don't have central bank. By the way central banks are responsible for inflation, a hyperinflation in most Latin American countries, especially Venezuela or Argentina, so in these countries you would especially appreciate if there is no central bank. Panama is really developed countries, not as Germany, but one of the most developed countries in the South America, where there is great weather and also they have special visas for retired people, and so it's definitely great country for digital nomads. Strongly recommended. And I'm going to explain you also more rights, like better country than Estonia for example.

Ok, so this is my Panamian ID, cedula, it's called “carne de residente de Panama”. So I get it for 10 years up to 2029 you can see the my blood type, which is B minus, and also that I am donor of human organs in case of I die for example. And also I have my Panamanian driving license. So the cool thing about it about Panamanian driving license is that if you have German driving license and then you want to ask for English driving or Spanish driving license, you have to give up, you have to return your German driving license. But on in Panama now I have two driving licenses, and this is super cool because the more driving licenses you have, it's better for you because you can still use, you can choose which driving license where you want to use in the given country. So for example from the next year we have a new law according to which Slovak police like traffic police will be connected with the Slovak tax office. So for example if I have any unpaid taxes, for example with a special “dog tax”, for example ID for pet, the traffic police in Slovakia can confiscate my Slavic driving license, but if I use like a non European legal document, which is my Panamanian traffic license they cannot confiscate this document. This is super cool because that's the reason why I use my Panamanian driving license in Europe, and I use my Slovak European driving license in South America.

So some other benefits of having non permanent residency in the Europe Union, the thing is that you basically make some kind of legislation firewall. So the thing is that one cool feature of Panama is there is no state postal office, I mean a functional state postal office. So if German government wants to send you anything, they need to use private courier like DHL or something like that, and it'll cost maybe 100 euros. So if your local European government who wants to send you anything, they need to pay at least 100 euro. And also for example in many situation it doesn't make any economic incentives to send you anything from former government to Panama.

The cool feature is that you can still have two passports, for example, we as Slovak can have two Slovak passports, so if I want something from my government, I just use, I don't have my Slovak national ID, I just use my Slavic passport and I'm immediately solve any problems if I need to, if I need to solve any problems.

Another cool thing is that changing residency back to Germany or to Slovakia, to your home country, is super easy especially if you have there family or you have a company, so any other citizen of Germany, of your citizen of Slovakia, so it's question in Slovakia is question of five euro I think, you can change it immediately, and after you solve what is necessary you can change it back and you can give up your residency.

So I was also thinking considering some alternatives, probably quite a good country, territorial taxation country is Paraguay, but unfortunately I don't know anyone in this country. And other country is Malaysia, Malaysia is cool, because Malaysia has double tax treaty agreements with most European countries, and there is also some like tax paradise which is called Labuan, it is the special part of Malaysia which has the maximum limit of taxation. So it pays some percentage from income and when you reach I think it's seven or eight thousand dollars now yearly, so when you reach this limit, you don't need to pay anything more. But the problem is that in Malaysia it is really difficult to get something like permanent residency and also it's a dictatorship country like also Singapore, Dubai, Saudi Arabia. So I decided not to consider these countries just because I don't want to suffer like a dictatorship regime. Another interesting country is Nicaragua, but unfortunately now they have some political protests — the Nicaraguan president was shooting, his government was shooting to students, so not very safe environment, political environment. And also Costa Rica. The problem of Costa Rica is that it's really expensive. I think Costa Rica is even more expensive than Germany probably. So and to have the permanent residence in Costa Rica you have to buy a property in Costa Rica, which will cost you 100,000 euros and it's really expensive.

Ok, so now I described how to choose your permanent residency, now I'm going to choose how to choose the suitable country for a company. So before you start your company, you should definitely ask where are your customers. So if you have customer out of the Europe Union, usually doesn't make any sense to use or to create European company. So in this situation is definitely better to use any offshore destination. And if you have customer, I mean when you're providing some services, like program or IT services, and if your customer in the Europe Union, I think probably the best option is to consider Cyprus, because Cyprus is a European country, with the EU, also in the euro zone, and they have the least income tax which is only 12.5 percent, or Estonia which has very 20 percent income tax but what is cool about Estonia, you have an obligation to pay taxes only when you want to withdraw money from your Estonia company.

And another cool thing is that if you have any physical office in the given country, and it's almost impossible to prove that you're like a job, your physical project was done in the given country, it doesn't make sense to have any Slovak, German any company, and you should definitely move your business to Cyprus or Estonia, and avoid like a high taxes and stupid bureaucracy.

Ok, so the question is why should I leave my company from Slovakia, Czech Republic. I think pretty similar reason or in the most European country, because we have high taxes, and you have mandatory social health care insurance. In Slovakia we have pretty unstable environments for entrepreneurs, so every election, like business or company laws change, we have a lot of privacy dangerous law. So I don't recommend to do business in these countries.

Ok. And one important information is that, I mentioned you that when you give up your permanent residence in Germany for example, it does not need to be enough, when you don't want to pay taxes in Germany, because despite this fact if you spend more than half a year in Germany, you have still have an obligation to pay taxes in Germany. And even you don't spend in Germany more than half year, and you have something what is called centre of your interest in your home country, you still have an obligation to pay taxes in Germany. So what is necessary to eliminate the center of your interest you know in your country. So firstly you should give up your permanent residency, you should leave up official job. So the whole hack I'm describing here is just for company owners, you cannot be employed in any corporation. This pretty necessary to say. You have to change it together with your wife or your husband. So if your wife or your husband does not want to change his permanent residency to Panama for example, you should divorce, because otherwise your husband or wife will be like a security, privacy risk you know — the center of your interest. You should sell all your properties, but the cool thing is that in case of Panamanian residency you need to create Panamanian companies, so you can sell your German property, German flat or German house, to your Panamanian company. Also if you have German company or any company, you should sell it to your Panamanian company.

You should become perpetual traveler, which means you shouldn't stay in any country more than half year, because if you stand in any country more than half year, you have an obligation according to the international agreement to have tax residency in the given country. And you should become the homeless with no obligations.

Towards your bank accounts. Using bank accounts is very sensitive, for example I stopped using my bank accounts maybe five years ago. I completely switch to cryptocurrencies. And do not consider Bitcoin to be like a trusty, safe cryptocurrency, so I switched to Monero. I’m the Monero guy. So you should be also aware that if you use bank accounts, your bank, your Visa or MasterCard company, government basically they know everything about you, so you have no financial privacy at all.

And it is not possible to close all your bank accounts, usually you can survive with these virtual cards like Revolute, N26. I also have a separate presentation how it is possible to completely switch from the traditional bank accounts to cryptocurrencies. There is a link. And also you should be aware there is no country in the world with the bank secrecy anymore. So there is no country where you can open the bank account and it'll be like a “secret”. No country. The only thing if you want to survive is just to switch truly anonymous cryptocurrencies.

So as I already said I recommend to use Monero for anonymous savings. So if you need to pay for anything there is a great service we just call xmr.to You can pay other expenses in Bitcoin. Also there is a great service which is called lamium.io. Do you know lamium? lamium is super cool, it is a way how to pay all your invoices in Europe Union, German invoices for example, without KYC and without AML. And it doesn't even support registration, so we just upload your invoice in Germany, German invoice you need to pay, you send crypto, and there is a pool, decentralized pool of payers, and some guy just accept your Bitcoin, and he will be paid from his personal bank account. So for example what you can do, and you don't have a bank account, you can delegate all payments of your own invoices to random people.

There are also you can use Bitcoin debit cards, like Bitwala or WireX. Unfortunately it's not possible to get this card in an anonymous way. So you have to provide to do KYC/AML if you want to ask for Bitcoin debit cards. For example in Prague, like Prague is one of one of my home city, there are like 176 places we can use crypto. The biggest e-shop in Czech Republic is called Alza.cz. Alza is like Czech Amazon — they sale basically absolutely everything, and they accept crypto. So you can easily order from your computer toilet paper from Alza.cz. And also the biggest food delivery chain which is called Dame Jidlo in Prague, they also accept crypto. So when you are able to order anything with a crypto, and even able to order the food with a crypto, you basically don't need to use any bank account. And still if you have a company, and you don't want to use bank accounts, what you can do, you can register your company for example simplecoin.eu, which is basically set up a gateway, so if you receive any invoice in fiat, you can easily pay this invoice by your company and so basically as a company you don't need a bank account, which is super cool.

Also it should be a word that if you use official cryptocurrencies, I mean centralized cryptocurrencies, you have to follow KYC/AML. So if you don't like this KYC/AML regulation you should use decentralized crypto exchanges like bisq or HodlHodl.

Choose your global healthcare insurance. This is super cool, so if you are in Germany, you have to be customer of the oligopoly of a few healthcare insurance providers, but when you give up, you can choose from the global market. So there are a lot of players like Cigna, Allianz for example. Personally I paid very cheap healthcare insurance which is called SafetyWing, and its global, except of the US. And it was a very easy way, so basically I pay everything in cash. When I visit any medical doctor in any country, I just take receipt, I scan this receipt, send it to email to my health care insurance company, and they just sent me money back, so this is super cool.

Also is that when you are willing to be global and flexible, you can save a lot of money. So for example as many perpetual travelers I know that in Hungary or in Colombia there are the cheapest and the best dentists. If you want to do like eye surgery the best country and cheapest country is Czech Republic. So depending what kind of medical problem you have, you can visit specific countries.

Also choose your mobile operator. So there are many global mobile operators you are probably not aware of. This by the fact that I am not a big fan of Google, I decided to use the project which is the best and it's called Google Project FI. So what I have now, I have an unlimited data for $45 in all countries of the world. So basically I travel a lot and I visit any countries in Asia, Africa, South America, US and I don't need to pay any money for roaming. So I have like unlimited data in all countries just super cool. You don't need to trust Google because what you can do, you can make like VPN connection, use encrypted communication, so basically Google will not know any sensitive information about your communication. And the cool thing is that Google does not want to know your identity, so you can activate this Google FI, just download your EC, you just need to find a way how to pay the invoice to Google. So basically they don't care about your ID, they just need your money.

Fine. Also there's another cool service we just called hushed.com. Using this service you can find, you can buy a phone number basically in any country, and you can use this service in completely anonymous way, you can buy using Bitcoins, and you can buy like US, Canadian number, you can use this number for SMS text messaging, for receiving messages, for making calls. And the cool thing is that when you use like cloning application like Duplex or Dual Space with hushed.com you basically create your new anonymous Signal identity, WhatsApp identity, I don't know messenger identity, so you can create on one phone the alternative identity, messenger identity.

Also when you travel a lot, you should embrace sharing economy, so there are special global working places, one is called Regus.com, WeWork.com. And so basically you pay some monthly subscription, and you in all biggest cities of the world, you can go and visit the cities for office, you have practically everything what you need in your office. There are also global temporary car rental companies, probably in Germany you know Car2Go or DriveNow. We have also similar one Car4way in Prague, up! city in Bratislava. Bike sharing system — last time I visited Berlin I registered in ten different bike sharing systems which is super cool. And every time when you visit some country you should definitely check possibilities of the local sharing economy.

And the last important thing is that if you are so lucky and you are able to opt out of the system, and really like it, you should try to hub your friends to follow you, and also try to opt out the system and move to parallel society, because I'm more than sure that thanks to these opt out advices you can achieve more freedom than the traditional voting for example, trying to change your system, or political system, because for example in Slovakia we are totally skeptical, we don't believe in any political change. So if you want to have more freedom, you should definitely try to opt out of the system and embrace the global possibilities of all countries. So being flexible and global at the same time you can achieve new kind of freedom.

Maybe you can say: “Oh this is really complex and really difficult. Should I do it?” And there is a quote from the Greek poet: “The secret to happiness is freedom… And the secret to freedom is your courage”. So I definitely recommend you to do that, embrace the new digital world with no borders, and become new rich. I'm not sure if you know the term “new rich”. So basically “new rich” means that new rich people are not people who have a lot of money, but they have to visit corporation and work since 8:00 a.m. until 6:00 p.m. or 4:00 p.m. The new reach people are people who are willing to move, and who have a free time. So if you are portable, and you are able to work from any part of the world, and you have time, you are definitely “new rich”. So thanks a lot for attention!

No time? So no time for questions.

_Diego:_ Yeah, sorry, no time for questions. I know, if you guys do have questions, so Wilder is going to be over here offstage, you can go ahead and swarm him, give him a bunch of groupies around him, so he can feel very special.
