# JosefJ

_**Critical Decentralisation Cluster 36c3 - Hackatoshi's Flying Circuit**_

[youtu.be/crjrXb30Tz0](https://youtu.be/crjrXb30Tz0)

_**Abstract**_

Paralelní Polis' mission is to bring alternatives and tools for preventing authoritarian tendencies in society. Hackatoshi’s Flying Circuit is an intervention of cypherpunks into both virtual and physical public space to concentrate inspiration and knowledge to address sick parts of the system and fix them with solutions resulting from privacy and decentralized principles.

_**Transcription**_

_Diego:_ Okay everybody, it is time for our last talk of the day, of С3, of our lives, it is time for the last talk that this world will ever hear or see again. We have Josef here, he is going to be talking to us about the link between hipsters and avocados. That's right hipsters have a great love for avocados they put him on toast, they put him in their shakes, they put them in the blender, and it's really bizarre. But Paralelni Polis people are nothing if not kind of like we’re tech hipster people. So I'm gonna hand this over to him and he can explain why he brought this and because I don't have an explanation why he would bring it onstage, but I'm sure that he has a perfectly good one. So please say, share all of our curiosity about this

_Josef:_ Thanks. Well, I would start with a question: is any want to have pepper, bite a chance. That’s there really isn't like a reason for avocado, I mean this is going to be like super lightweight, it's not a tech talk anything like that, it’s just an invitation.

So a year ago which was the first time when Paralelni Polis participated here at the CDC assembly, we were kind of like amazed from just the community, like the level of community participation and all of the great stuff that was happening around and actually when we were driving back to Prague with the van we were thinking: yeah well it would be great to actually kind of bring parts of CCC to Prague. And we came up with an idea to like host a Hackathon which is just kind of like a funny little thing, it has nothing to do with building startups or building projects, but should really just focus on playing around with technology and like messing things up.

So we came up with the Hackatshi's Flying Circuit which like just technically start at last year this year in 2019, but we want to repeat it in 2020 and this is the first time we're actually officially kicking off invitations to the Hackathon.

So some essentials. What is Hackatshi's Flying Circuit. There's a is a true: Hackathon it shouldn't be focused on like business models, it shouldn't be focused on like building up a company you know like disrupting industries, nothing like that. It should be just about like having fun and playing around with interesting stuff. When is it happening, end of September, it will likely happen close to week to the Hackers Congress, you can look it up at HCPP.cz, at they're going to be further announcements made. Where is happening – in Paralelni Polis in Prague, in case you didn't check, check the part of the assembly you can still like grab a coffee over there, but you most likely heard like most of the ins and outs about Paralelni Polis already. Why we are doing this – basically just to have fun and actually have a Hackathon about hacking and not like building a company. And it's organized by mostly volunteers around Hackers Congress and Paralelni Polis.

Few numbers there is one Hackathon focus on technology and exploits this year or like in 2020 we are aiming to get around like 100 people, it should be its last three days, and last year we had three competing tracks: privacy, the centralization and urban hacktivism. We don't tell people what to deal with and what to solve. What's important to us, is that there are some core values in the projects and in the submissions. We not only like accept kind of newly built tool sets for whatever purpose you want to use but also like revealing box in open source code bases. So the people in the judging committee were mostly… Oh sorry, that was my 4:20 alarm. So the people in the committee are mostly the people that you can meet here in the assembly, and yeah well there wasn't any strict process for picking the winners, that was basically about like sitting together and like going through the repos and talking to you to the participants and picking up a dinner after like a weekend-long get-together. And among the regel like Hackathon tracks we also announced the Open Exploit Award which I'm going to talk about in a bit.

So as I mentioned the only kind of like important part of the Hackathon and all the submissions is to be like values aligned. Like we don't aim for a particle business solution like a vertical industry we just really want to see what people can build when they have some motivation and a space provided to you to build stuff.

So among the winning projects this year were kind of like three highlights. The first one was project Pisk.cz which is basically a secure drop for journalistic sources or focus on like checking Slovak journalists. The second one was a project that was brought in by a guy from Sea Base called TincubeETH which is basically a doctorized Ethereum nodes behind Tor. And the last one from the urban hacktivism track was Parallel Lands which is kind of like an artistic concept for of chipping pieces of land of like unused land in the city and then claiming it as a DAO. So these guys actually, I think I've seen him like twice or like three times during the entire Hackathon, and the last time I seen him was like after midnight when they were leaving the building with like a bag of concrete and a shovel to go and implant these chips. So this year we were competing for all together $5000 and pay didn't die and some IDE licenses which were now open-source obviously, but… yeah, well so nice…

So a bit more about the Open Exploit Award. We thought it would be nice to have kind of like a ceremony to actually like you know acknowledge and sort of like give thanks to people that revealed something super interesting, ideal in the previous year obviously like not all of these were revealed in 2019, but quite a huge portion of this we're like reveal here at CCC. So we… the committee of judges like nominated and impact like three winners of the Open Exploit Award for 2019. The first one is the Wallet.fail project which showed like a feasible hardware would seed extraction that was actual last year here at CCC. The second one was EFAIL which showed buckston implementation of implementations of open PGP and the third one was Meltdown and Spectre which is a processor memory leakage exploit. And like all of these three teams were awarded though um like a certificate for winning the prize and then we sent them or we are going to send them the posters made by emfish who does like all of the all of the visuals for Paralelni Polis.

Kind of… organically the committee of judges also decided to announce antiawards like the in the scope of the Hackathon. So the first antiaward was awarded to two one Department of Kazakhstan government for trying to intercept all like all of the https traffic by basically enforcing like a state-issued ssl certificates. The second one was awarded to company SyTech which is providing services to Russian Secret Service and we are awarding them namely for the project Nautilus-S which aims to deanonymize total traffic. And then the third one was actually sort of a mixture of projects that did allowed implanting malware into the apps. And because we didn't want to send the “trophy” to all of them we just like pick the first obvious one – we are going to send this to Facebook. The trophy is on the picture so we are going to send them like a nice letter and the 3D printed red penis just to kind of express our feelings.

So and that's about it that was the invitation. If you're interested in the event you can go to flyingcircuit.com and you can sign up your interest, if you want to get an invite. Most of the invites are done in like peer-to-peer fashion, so like we just basically try to raise the awareness like it you know through talking to people and like if you know anyone that this could be interesting for please share it with them.

And to kind of close this down this was our invitation from last year as I mentioned we just started like thinking about the event on the way from CCC, so be you know interested what comes up from today's trip back to Prague. But yeah I hope this will at least attract some Python developers in this place… which I'm not sure it will. Is there anything I should press? Oh now.

So this was the invite for last year, I hope that's kind of like obvious about the seriousness of all of this and yeah I'm hoping to see you next year, and if you're interested you can ping anyone from Polis or you can just go to the website and sign up and you will get an invite eventually. Thanks everyone, thanks for giving me some space on the stage, I'm not sure like if you want to take it over… and just yeah well I didn't assume there will be any but like do you have any questions. Well there is one.

_Audience:_ It's not really a question it's just like I want to say you're amazing Josef. You know what you're doing is so cool.

_Josef:_ Well thank you really… love you too buddy, well that was a nice ending, well yeah and that's thank you so much and take care!

_Diego:_ Thank you so much Josef
